Propose Memory Manager for NUMA awareness (#1203)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/20200203-memory-manager.md

      - [Topology Manager changes](#topology-manager-changes)
      - [Internal Container Lifecycle changes](#internal-container-lifecycle-changes)
    - [Feature Gate and Kubelet Flags](#feature-gate-and-kubelet-flags)
- [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
  - [Phase 1: Alpha (target v1.1x)](#phase-1-Alpha-target-v11x)
  - [Phase 2: Beta](#phase-1-Beta)
  - [GA (stable)](#ga-stable)
- [Appendix](#appendix)
  - [How DPDK works](#how-dpdk-works)
  - [Requirements to guarantee performance of DPDK](#requirements-to-guarantee-performance-of-dpdk)
  - [How Linux OOM system works](#how-oom-system-works)
  - [How Kubernetes utilizes Linux OOM system](#how-kubernetes-utilizes-linux-oom-system)
<!-- /toc -->

# Overview

NUMA Awareness is well known for a solution to boost performance for diverse use cases including DPDK and Database on multi socket machine. Since Kubernetes 1.16, it started to support NUMA aware resource allocation through Topology Manager for NUMA sensitive containers.
Topology Manager coordinates resource alignment by using hint interface that allows advertising the resource capability of NUMA node.

> In kubenet, CPU Manager, Device Manager & Plugins advertise their resources with topology information as topology hint then Topology manager calculates best set of topology hints for containers.

Author: Done

> In kubenet, CPU Manager, Device Manager & Plugins advertise their resources with topology information as topology hint then Topology manager calculates best set of topology hints for containers.

Author: It meant GPU plugins or sr-iov plugin.
But actually Manager pass hints to Topology Manager.
So I just removed "& Plugins".

> In kubenet, CPU Manager, Device Manager & Plugins advertise their resources with topology information as topology hint then Topology manager calculates best set of topology hints for containers.

Author: Done

But there's no feature for memory and hugepages. It leads kubelet to result NUMA Un-Aware memory and hugepages management for containers.

> And it can cause inter-NUMA node communication for Memory access which leads to increase an I/O latency and decrease performance.

Author: Done

> The Memory Manager is proposed to provide a way of guaranting NUMA awareness for memory and hugepages usage to kubelet.

Author: Done

# Motivation

## Related Features

> - [Node Topology Manager][node-topology-manager] is a feature that collects topology hint from various hint providers to calculate NUMA affinity for a container. Topology Manager judge container whether admit or not under criteria of configured topology policy and calculated NUMA affinity.

Author: Done

- [CPU Manager][cpu-manager] is a feature provides a solution for CPU Pinning based on cgroups cpuset subsystem, it also offer topology hint to Topology Manager.

- [Device Manager][device-manager] is a one of features provides topology hint for Topology Manager. The main objectivity of Device Manager is allow vendors to adverise their resources and capability to kubelet.

- [Hugepages][hugepages] is a feature allows container to consume pre-allocated hugepages with pod isolation of huge pages.

- [Node Allocatable Feature][node-allocatable-feature] is a feature helps to reserve compute resources to prevent resource starvation. The kube-reserved and system-reserved is used to reserve resources for kubelet and system(OS, etc). At the moment(1.17), following resources are supported to reserve: cpu, memory, ephemeral storage.

## Related issues

- [Hardware topology awareness at node level (including NUMA)][numa-issue]
- [Support Container Isolation of Hugepages][hugepage-issue]
- [Support isolating memory to single NUMA node][memory-issue]

## Goals

- Guaranteeing isolation of Memory and Hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

> - Providing topology hint for Memory and Hugepages to Topology manager, to make Topology Manager to be able to coordinate Memory and Hugepages with CPUs, I/O devices together.

Author: Done

> ## Non-Goals

Author: Done

- Updating scheduler, pod spec is out of scope at this point.

> - This proposal only focus on Linux based system.

Author: Done

## User Stories

### Story 1 : Networking Acceleration using DPDK

- The system such as real-time trading system and 5G system, which requires networking acceleration, uses DPDK to guarantee low latency of packet processing. DPDK(Data Plane Development Kit) is set of libraries to accelerate packet processing on userspace. DPDK requires dedicated resources(such as exclusive cpu usage, hugepages and DPDK compatile Network Interface Card) and alignment of resources to sigle NUMA node to accelerate its performance. There should be a way to guarantee reserve Memory and Hugepages with other computing resources on desinated Socket for containerized Network Function which uses DPDK.

### Story 2 : Database

- Databases(Oracle, PostgreSQL, MySQL, MongoDB, SAP) consumes massive Memory and Hugepages, in order to reduce memory access latency and improve performance dramatically resources(CPU, Memory, Hugepages, I/O Devices) should be aligned.

# Proposal

## Proposed Changes

### New Component: Memory Manager
 Memory Manager is a new component of Kubelet, it guarantees NUMA aware memory usage for the Pod which has Guarantedd QoS, here memory includes hugepages.

>  To guarantee NUMA aware memory usage, When Guaranteed QoS Pod admission is requested, Memory Manager caculates NUMA node affinity to figure out appropriate NUMA node where enough memory and hugepages exist for containers in the Pod. Then, when Pod deployed, it enfoces containers in the Pod to consume memory and hugepages from designated NUMA node which Topology Manager selected.

Author: Done

> Note That :

Author: Done

> - Memory Manager isolate Memory and Hugepages to single NUMA node to prevent remote(Inter-NUMA) memory access. For this, Memory Manager enforce cgroups cpuset subsystem using CRI API. For more details, see [CPUSET Enforcement](#cpuset-enforcement).

Author: Done

- Memory Manager guarantees that the container(in Guanteed QoS Pod) consumes requested amount of memory(which is isolated to a NUMA node) through linux OOM system. For more details, see [OOM Score Enforcement](#oom-score-enforcement)

More details of this component are listed below.

> #### The Concept of Safety Zone

Author: Done

 Memory Manager has the concept of safety zone to manage memory and hugepages at the NUMA node level. Basically, Kubernetes support reserving memory at the node level through Node Allocatable feature. It provides options such as `system-reserved` and `kube-reserved` to reserve CPUs, Memory, Storage for system services and kubernetes system components. Fortunately, it is possible to reserve CPUs with consideration of NUMA because CPUs are reserved using their logical core number. On the other hand, it is impossible to reserve memory with consideration of NUMA, the only thing we can do is reserving memory at the node level.

 The concept of safety zone is proposed to reserve certain amount of memory and hugepages equally on each NUMA node. The value of safety zone can be confiugred by configuration parameter of Memory Manager. For more details see the [Feature Gate and Kubelet Flags](#feature-gate-and-kubelet-flags) section.
- For memory, total amount of sefety zone memory(value of safety zone memory * number of NUMA nodes) cannot be greater than total amount of reserved memory(kube-reserved, system-reserved and eviction-threshold) by Node Allocatable feature.

> - For hugepages, at the moment(v1.17), Node Allocateble features does not support reserving hugepages, so that Memory Manager will not have safety zone for hugepages. When Node Allocatable feature start to support reserving hugepages([#83541](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/83541)), safety zone for hugapages will works in the same manner of memory.

Author: Done

For example, if Node Allocatable feature reserved total 10Gbi memory on node which is two sockets server machine, safety zone memory cannot be greater than 5Gbi.

                  +-----------------+-------------------------+
NUMA node0(40Gi)  | Safety Zone(5Gi)|    Allocatable(35Gi)    |
                  +-----------------+-------------------------+
                  +-----------------+-------------------------+
NUMA node1(40Gi)  | Safety Zone(5Gi)|    Allocatable(35Gi)    |
                  +-----------------+-------------------------+
TBD: this text images will be replaced to real image.

> #### The Concept of Reserved Zone

Author: Done

 Memory Manager has the concept of reserved zone to calculate NUMA node affinity precisely.
The Reserved zone is literally reserved for the containers which has Guaranteed QoS. Container doesn't always consume memory as much as they requested. For example container may request 5Gbi memory, but it can consumes only 3Gbi at runtime. Memory Manager treats requested memory of Guaranteed QoS containers as reserved memory. Memory Manager guarantee Guaranteed QoS containers usage of memory and hugepages on single NUMA node as they requested by using [CPUSET enforcement](#cpuset-enforcement) and [OOM Score Enforcement](#oom-score-enforcement). 
           
           +---------------+------------+--------------+
           |               |       Allocatable         |
NUMA node  +  Safety Zone  +------------+--------------+
           |               |  Reserved  |     free     |
           +---------------+------------+--------------+
TBD: this text images will be replaced to real image.

> Note that 

Author: Done

- Reserved zone cannot be greater than Allocatable zone.

> - Typical Linux processes and Containers which has BestEffort or Burstable QoS may consumes memory on a NUMA node where Guaranteed QoS containers also consumes memory. It is also possible that Guaranteed QoS Containers requested lots of memory but consumes just a little bit of them and the others occupy reserved zone when only few free memory is available on the NUMA node. At this situation, OOM may happen by Guaranteed QoS Container if the container try to consume more memory. Then the others will be killed by OOM killer to make free memory. Because, unlike Guaranteed QoS containers, the others has high OOM socre(which has low priority at OOM system).

Author: Done

> - Typical Linux processes and Containers which has BestEffort or Burstable QoS may consumes memory on a NUMA node where Guaranteed QoS containers also consumes memory. It is also possible that Guaranteed QoS Containers requested lots of memory but consumes just a little bit of them and the others occupy reserved zone when only few free memory is available on the NUMA node. At this situation, OOM may happen by Guaranteed QoS Container if the container try to consume more memory. Then the others will be killed by OOM killer to make free memory. Because, unlike Guaranteed QoS containers, the others has high OOM socre(which has low priority at OOM system).

Author: Done

> - Typical Linux processes and Containers which has BestEffort or Burstable QoS may consumes memory on a NUMA node where Guaranteed QoS containers also consumes memory. It is also possible that Guaranteed QoS Containers requested lots of memory but consumes just a little bit of them and the others occupy reserved zone when only few free memory is available on the NUMA node. At this situation, OOM may happen by Guaranteed QoS Container if the container try to consume more memory. Then the others will be killed by OOM killer to make free memory. Because, unlike Guaranteed QoS containers, the others has high OOM socre(which has low priority at OOM system).

Author: Done

> #### NUMA node affinity for memory and hugepages

Reviewer: new line

Author: Done

It can cause inter-NUMA node communication for Memory access which leads to increase an I/O latency and decrease performance.

The Memory Manager is proposed to provide a way to guarantee NUMA awareness for memory and hugepages usage to kubelet.

# Motivation

## Related Features

- [Topology Manager][topology-manager] is a feature that collects topology hint from various hint providers to calculate NUMA affinity for a container. Topology Manager judge container whether admit or not under criteria of configured topology policy and calculated NUMA affinity.

- [CPU Manager][cpu-manager] is a feature provides a solution for CPU Pinning based on cgroups cpuset subsystem, it also offer topology hint to Topology Manager.

- [Device Manager][device-manager] is a one of features provides topology hint for Topology Manager. The main objectivity of Device Manager is allow vendors to adverise their resources and capability to kubelet.

- [Hugepages][hugepages] is a feature allows container to consume pre-allocated hugepages with pod isolation of huge pages.

> - [Node Allocatable Feature][node-allocatable-feature] is a feature helps to reserve compute resources to prevent resource starvation. The kube-reserved and system-reserved is used to reserve resources for kubelet and system(OS, etc). At the moment(1.17), following resources are supported to reserve: cpu, memory, ephemeral storage.

Reviewer 2: Do we support reserving these resources on a per-numa-node basis?  If not, are there plans to do so?

# Proposal

## Proposed Changes

### New Component: Memory Manager

Memory Manager is a new component of Kubelet, it guarantees NUMA aware memory usage for the Pod which has Guarantedd QoS, here memory includes hugepages.

To guarantee NUMA aware memory usage, when Guaranteed QoS Pod admission is requested, Memory Manager caculates NUMA node affinity to figure out appropriate NUMA node where enough memory and hugepages exist for containers in the Pod. Then, when Pod deployed, it enfoces containers in the Pod to consume memory and hugepages from designated NUMA node which Topology Manager selected.

NOTE:
- Memory Manager isolates Memory and Hugepages to single NUMA node to prevent remote(Inter-NUMA) memory access. For this, Memory Manager enforce cgroups cpuset subsystem using CRI API. For more details, see [CPUSET Enforcement](#cpuset-enforcement).

- Memory Manager guarantees that the container(in Guanteed QoS Pod) consumes requested amount of memory(which is isolated to a NUMA node) through linux OOM system. For more details, see [OOM Score Enforcement](#oom-score-enforcement)

More details of this component are listed below.

#### The Concept of Safety Zone

> Memory Manager has the concept of safety zone to manage memory and hugepages at the NUMA node level. Basically, Kubernetes support reserving memory at the node level through Node Allocatable feature. It provides options such as `system-reserved` and `kube-reserved` to reserve CPUs, Memory, Storage for system services and kubernetes system components. Fortunately, it is possible to reserve CPUs with consideration of NUMA because CPUs are reserved using their logical core number. On the other hand, it is impossible to reserve memory with consideration of NUMA, the only thing we can do is reserving memory at the node level.

Reviewer 2: Why is it "impossible to reserve memory with consideration of NUMA"?  Do you just mean that it is impossible given the existing flags for kubelet but would be possible if we changed those flags?

Author: @cbf123 
` Do you just mean that it is impossible given the existing flags for kubelet but would be possible if we changed those flags?`
=> Nope,  we cannot make it with just changing the flags.
When a process attempts memory allocation using `malloc` families, Linux kernel doesn't allocate physical pages. 
The kernel just `commits` memory to make a process think it got pages.
Then the kernel allocates real pages when a process attempts writing data to memory.

So, it means we don't know that when the Linux process take pages in runtime, also which NUMA node the process will take pages from in multi-socket machine.

To guarantee a container take pages from a NUMA node, we have to do:
1) something should know the amount of allocatable memory for each NUMA node.
2) schedule a container to specific NUMA node where it has adequate memory to serve a container.
3) then pin memory to specific NUMA node using cpuset.mems

below things(safety zone, allocatable zone) are proposed for `1)`.

Reviewer 2: While I agree with everything you've said, I don't see how that prevents you from reserving memory in a NUMA-aware way.  It does add the requirement that in order to do it every Kubernetes container would need to be affined to a single NUMA node.

> The concept of safety zone is proposed to reserve certain amount of memory and hugepages equally on each NUMA node. The value of safety zone can be confiugred by configuration parameter of Memory Manager. For more details see the [Feature Gate and Kubelet Flags](#feature-gate-and-kubelet-flags) section.

Reviewer 2: How do you propose to handle reserving hugepages of different sizes?

Author: At the impl level, the Memory Manager will have 2+ memory map:
1) one for conventional memory.
2) particular memory map for particular hugepage size.

Then when the NUMA node, where a container will be pinned, determined, cpuset.mems will be used to set NUMA restriction.

Author: I will mention it on KEP.

Reviewer 2: I was wondering what the actual Kubelet flags and/or commandline args would look like.  `system-reserved` and `kube-reserved`, for example.

Author: Oh, i got it now, it might be part of below section.
I will show you example tomorrow.
- Proposed Configuration Flag:  
  `TBD`

> - For memory, total amount of sefety zone memory(value of safety zone memory * number of NUMA nodes) cannot be greater than total amount of reserved memory(kube-reserved, system-reserved and eviction-threshold) by Node Allocatable feature.

Reviewer 2: So is the safety zone considered to be *part of* the reserved memory, or is it *in addition to* the reserved memory?  (Same for hugepages.)

Maybe consider making the answer to this explicit in the document?

Author: `Maybe consider making the answer to this explicit in the document?`
=> sure, I also got some review from coleague, I wil consider it together.

The fomular to dertermine allocatable size of memory is:
`total memory of NUMA node` - `Safety Zone`

So it will not be part of reserved memory, reserved memory means amount of reserved for memory for container in Guaranteed QoS Class Pod from allocatable zone.

```
           +---------------+------------+--------------+
           |               |       Allocatable         |
NUMA node  +  Safety Zone  +------------+--------------+
           |               |  Reserved  |     free     |
           +---------------+------------+--------------+
```

Reviewer: I was sure, by reserved here, we are meaning reserved memory for kube daemons and OS tasks, how does it connect to `Guaranteed QoS Class Pod`?

Author: Oh, I think I made a mistake. :(
I just confused between `reserved` of Allocatable Zone and `reserved memory` of node allocatable feature.
Guys, please forget my above answer.

` total amount of sefety zone memory(value of safety zone memory * number of NUMA nodes) cannot be greater than total amount of reserved memory(kube-reserved, system-reserved and eviction-threshold) by Node Allocatable feature.`
The reserved memory on the above sentence means the reserved memory by node allocatable feature at the node level.

Answer for @cbf123 is: 
Yes, the safety zone will be part of reserved memory(of node allocatable feature).

For hugepages, node allocatable feature doesn't have any mechanism to reserve hugepages not.
so Memory Manager won't have a safety zone before Node allocatable feature support reserving hugepages.
I write about it right below, see 146 line.
```
- For hugepages, at the moment(v1.17), Node Allocateble features does not support reserving hugepages, so that Memory Manager will not have safety zone for hugepages. Once Node Allocatable feature will support hugepages reservation([#83541](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/83541)), safety zone for hugapages will works in the same manner of memory.
```

                  +-----------------+-------------------------+
```
_Figure: The example of safety zone._

#### The Concept of Reserved Zone

Memory Manager has the concept of reserved zone to calculate NUMA node affinity precisely. The reserved zone is literally reserved for the containers which has Guaranteed QoS. Container doesn't always consume memory as much as they requested. For example container may request 5Gbi memory, but it can consumes only 3Gbi at runtime. Memory Manager treats requested memory of Guaranteed QoS containers as reserved memory. Memory Manager guarantee Guaranteed QoS containers usage of memory and hugepages on single NUMA node as they requested by using [CPUSET enforcement](#cpuset-enforcement) and [OOM Score Enforcement](#oom-score-enforcement). 

```
           +---------------+------------+--------------+
           |               |       Allocatable         |
NUMA node  +  Safety Zone  +------------+--------------+
           |               |  Reserved  |     free     |
           +---------------+------------+--------------+
```
_Figure: The memory map of NUMA node._

NOTE:
- Reserved zone cannot be greater than Allocatable zone.

> - Typical Linux processes and containers which have BestEffort or Burstable QoS may consume memory on a NUMA node where Guaranteed QoS containers also consumes memory. It is also possible that Guaranteed QoS containers requested lots of memory but consumes just a little bit of them and the others occupy reserved zone when only few free memory is available on the NUMA node. At this situation, OOM may happen by Guaranteed QoS Container if the container try to consume more memory. Then others will be killed by OOM killer to make free memory. Because, unlike Guaranteed QoS containers, the others has high OOM socre(which has low priority at OOM system).

Reviewer 2: When the OOM-killer runs, is there any performance hit to the low-latency DPDK app running in the Guaranteed QoS pod?  If so, that seems like a potential problem.  Seems like it'd be better to prevent the OOM-killer from running in the first place.  That might require running each pod on a single NUMA node to ensure that the available memory per NUMA node is known, and enforce hard limits on how much memory can be allocated even by Burstable or BestEffort pods.

Author: I will comment on it after the meeting.

Author: In my mind, I don't think OOM-killer afftects the performance.
Kernel & containers(in G-QoS Pod with exclusive CPU usage) will consume different CPUs.
By node allocatable feature and `--reserved-cpus` flag, we can assign CPUs for system(includes kernel) & kubernetes core things explictly.
Just like `--reserved-cpus=0-3` in '--system-reserved', it means admistrator assignes CPU 0, 1, 2, 3 for the system.

Author: But I also agree that it can be potential problem.
I will perfome a kind of feasibility test for Memory Manager in Feb.
I think, triggering OOM while DPDK runing then measuring the performance of DPDK, it can be a good test scenario.
I will add it to test scenario.

Reviewer 2: Some years back when I did testing, when the OOM-killer ran it caused latency spikes on the whole system.  I don't know if that's still the case...has anyone tested what cyclictest looks like on one CPU when the OOM killer runs on another CPU?

Author: @cbf123
My team performed a test but we couldnt find latency spikes when global oom event is triggered.
I tested with pkgen & testpmd.
As i said above, i reserved cpus(two) for system-reserved.

#### NUMA node affinity for memory and hugepages

> Memory Manager calculates NUMA node affinity that represents which NUMA node has enough capacity of memory and/or hugepages for containers in Guaranteed QoS Pod. To calculate affinity, Memory Manager takes capacity of memory and pre-allocated hugepages per NUMA node on its intialize sequence then calculate `Allocatable Memory of NUMA node` for every NUMA nodes.  Then when pod admission is requested, Memory Manager checks the pod has Guaranteed QoS or not, if the pod has Guaranteed QoS, Memory Manager calculates NUMA node affinity by the following way: it checks resources availability of each NUMA nodes based on `Allocatable Memory of NUMA node` and total amount of `reserved` memory and hugepages of NUMA node.

Reviewer 2: I assume this calculation will be done for all valid hugepage sizes?

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1203/files#r376887295
sure :), as I commented on the above,

Memory Manager manage memory with pod, container ID so these function needs that too.

```go
package cm

func (i *internalContainerLifecycleImpl) PreStartContainer(...) {
  ...
  err := i.memoryManager.AddContainer(pod, containerID)
  ...
}

func (i *internalContainerLifecycleImpl) PreStopContainer(...) {
  ...
  err := i.memoryManager.RemoveContainer(pod, containerID)
  ...
}

func (i *internalContainerLifecycleImpl) PostStopContainer(...) {
  ...
  err := i.memoryManager.RemoveContainer(pod, containerID)
  ...
}
```
### Feature Gate and Kubelet Flags

A new feature gate will be added to enable the Memory Manager feature. This feature gate will be enabled in Kubelet, and will be disabled by default in the Alpha release.

- Proposed Feature Gate:  
  `--feature-gate=MemoryManager=true`

This will be also followed by a Kubelet Flag for the Memory Manager configuration, which is described above. It will have following validation condition:(`TBD`).
- Proposed Configuration Flag:  
  `TBD`

# Graduation Criteria

## Phase 1: Alpha (target v1.19)
- Feature gate is disabled by default.

> - Alpha implementation of Memory Manager based on SingleNUMA policy of Topology Manager

Reviewer 2: why only the "single numa node" policy?  What about "restricted"?

Author: Good point.
Memory Manager will generate topology hint for sigle numa selection.
But there is no reason to restrict Memory Manager to `single-numa-node` policy.
I will fix it.

- [Device Manager][device-manager] is a feature that device vendors can advertise their device resources like NIC and GPU devices through device-plugin so that kubelet can discover the devices to be used by containers. And also, Device Manager can give a hint of corresponding device's availability in NUMA nodes to Topology Manager.

- [Hugepages][hugepages] is a feature to assign pre-allocated hugepage resources to a container if requested.

- [Node Allocatable Feature][node-allocatable-feature] is a feature that helps to reserve compute resources to isolate whole resources on a host by certain purpose. For example, by this feature, kube-reserved and system-reserved can be defined to reserve resources for kubelet and system (i.e. OS kernel), respectively. In release 1.17, the feature supports following reservable resources: CPU, memory, and ephemeral storage.

## Related issues

- [Hardware topology awareness at node level (including NUMA)][numa-issue]
- [Support Container Isolation of Hugepages][hugepage-issue]
- [Support isolating memory to single NUMA node][memory-issue]

## Goals

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer: In general, the memory manager will just return the topology hint and topology manager will decide which NUMA node to pin resources, so you always can improve the topology manager without the need to touch other managers.

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer 3: > ... so you always can improve the topology manager without the need to touch other managers.

Yes but since the TopologyManager already has the strict single-node policy,
  1) why not make the MemoryManager more flexible, IOW instead of trying to fit containers into a single NUMA node, it should try to fit container into as few/close NUMA nodes as possibe (which will be a single node if it is possible), and
  2) let those folks with strict single-node requirements enforce that by using the single-node TopologyManager policy

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer: IIRC, topology hint contains all NUMA node that has enough requested resources, in case of memory manager it will return all NUMA nodes that have enough memory and hugepages(if requested), and topology manager will choose the best NUMA node, that suits all resources requests, again memory manager will not decide anything and the place where you should improve NUMA selection is the topology manager.

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Author: `to the lowest number of NUMA nodes` <- It was my goal, but I found there is no way to achieve it.

Since the kernel does not provide any mechanism to reserve or allocate a certain amount of memory per NUMA node, unlike the other resources such as CPU and PCI devices.

What we can do for memory is
1) set memory or hugepage usage limit(regardless of NUMA)
2) set NUMA node restriction for memory access with NUMA node index(include all type of memory e.g. hugepage).

And Kernel allocates physical pages for a process when a process writes a real data on the virtual memory.
(malloc family just bind a virtual memory without allocating physical pages)

So we don't know which pages and which NUMA nodes, a process will take before writing a data.

And most containers do not consume memory as same as they requested.
(Example A/ a container can request 1Gbi memory and consume only 800mbi.)

To calculate a topology hint of memory for NUAM node,
it is essential, expecting future usage of memory.
(In example A, a container still able to consume 200mbi memory in runtime.)

If we allow consuming memory from multiple NUMA node for a Guaranteed QoS Pod.
It is impossible to expect future usage.

So it is so hard to convince a better way.
what I mean is the limitation of the goal originates from the limitation of linux kernel.

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer 3: > `to the lowest number of NUMA nodes` <- It was my goal, but I found there is no way to achieve it.
> 
> Since the kernel does not provide any mechanism to reserve a certain amount of memory per NUMA node, unlike the other resources such as CPU and PCI devices.

True. The kernel does not allow you to control/weight memory allocations for individual NUMA nodes if you have more than one set in cpuset.mems for a cgroup. But I don't think that would be strictly required. If it was still requires, I don't see how you could get away with running both Guaranteed and BestEffort QoS class workloads on the same node without the MemoryManager losing track of exactly how much memory has been allocated to which NUMA node. After all, IIUC the BestEffort workloads will run without anything set in their cpuset.mems, so they will be spread accross all NUMA nodes.

I think you can still implement 'squeezing to the smallest number of NUMA nodes' but your memory accounting algorithm will be different/a bit more complex (or maybe pessimistic would be a better term) than you describe here. I think what you could do is that you track memory according to the tree of HW topology:
  - you have the NUMA nodes as the leaves at the bottom in the tree
  - above them you have the sockets, each sockets having its NUMA nodes as children
  - at the root, you have a node representing the full maching, with all sockets as children

At the bottom you start with the memory physically attached to the NUMA nodes. As you go up in the tree you always have as available memory the sum of available memory in the children. When you account for allocation, you assign the container to a node where it definitely fits in. You also account the memory allocation there as such. In all children of this allocation you assume the worst case: that the allocation would fully be taken from that single child (because as you yourself noticed/pointed out, you can't know or control where it will take place).

> 
> What we can do for memory is
> 
> 1. set memory or hugepage usage limit(regardless of NUMA)
> 2. set NUMA node restriction for memory access with NUMA node index(include all type of memory e.g. hugepage).
> 
> And Kernel allocates physical pages for a process when a process writes a real data on the virtual memory.
> (malloc family just bind a virtual memory without allocating physical pages)
> 
> So we don't know which pages and which NUMA nodes, a process will take before writing a data.
> 
> And most containers do not consume memory as same as they requested.
> (Example A/ a container can request 1Gbi memory and consume only 800mbi.)
> 
> To calculate a topology hint of memory for NUAM node,
> it is essential, expecting future usage of memory.
> (In example A, a container still able to consume 200mbi memory in runtime.)
> 
> If we allow consuming memory from multiple NUMA node for a Guaranteed QoS Pod.
> It is impossible to expect future usage.

Since (IIUC) Burstable containers will consume memory from multiple NUMA nodes, you already cannot fully guess future memory consumption per NUMA node.

> 
> So it is so hard to convince a better way.
> what I mean is the limitation of the goal originates from the limitation of linux kernel.

Yes, that's why my proposed algorithm is pessimistic to the max.

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer 2: If we care about the optimal-performance case (which clearly some of us do) then I think we need to prevent burstable/best-effort containers from consuming memory from multiple NUMA nodes.  Its the only way for us to guarantee that there's enough memory available on a given NUMA node to satisfy a high-performance container that *needs* single-numa-node alignment.

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Author: ```
I don't see how you could get away with running both Guaranteed and Burstable QoS class workloads on the same node without the MemoryManager losing track of exactly how much memory has been allocated to each NUMA node.
```
For more detail, the Memory Manager doesn't track any memory usage of containers.
Indeed, it doesn't take account of containers in non-guaranteed QoS Pod.

It just stores requested memory of admitted containers in Guaranteed QoS Pod to calculate topology hint for next containers.

You might be curious about how Memory Manager guarantee memory usage on the selected NUMA node.

I adopt a notion of the page collector(container killer),it is OOM killer of kernel.

If non-guaranteed containers took a physical pages so much from a NUMA node so that there is no free pages on the NUMA node even though Memory Manager guaranteed certain amount of memory for Guaranteed QoS container at the same NUMA node.

Then oom will be occurd by guaranteed QoS container when it tries to get more physical pages by writing a data to virtual memory.

here, oom killer(kernel) will start to kill container which has besteffort or burstable QoS.

Once any container is killed, kernel reclaims free pages then allocates free pages to Guaranteed QoS container.

It is working well because kubelet gives a different `oom_score_adj` value for processes in each QoS class Pod.

Processes in Guaranteed Qos Class Pod will have `-998` for oom_score_adj.
Processes in Burstable and besteffrot QoS class Pod will have a value between (2~1000).
https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/out-of-resource/#node-oom-behavior

once a process has '-998' for oom_score_adj, it gives high priority to avoid to be selected as a victim for oom.

Kubelet has `-999` to avoid oom-killer.
If a process has `-1000, oom-killer nerver consider that process.

I write about simplified version of it in the section `OOM Score Enforcement`.

```
#### OOM Score Enforcement

The fundamental idea of this feature depends on OOM score enforcement of Kubelet. Kubelet enforces different `oom_score_adj` values for each QoS Class of Pod. Kubelet sets the value of high priority(`-998`) for Guaranteed QoS Class Pod. It protects the containers from global OOM event while the containers consumes on designated NUMA node.

Based on `OOM score enforcement`, Memory Manager makes strong assumption that certain amount of reserved memory shall be available on the designated NUMA node.

However, some containers ,which in the non Guaranteed Pod which has the `oom_score_adj` value of low priority(`2~1000`), may consumes some reserved memory and makes no more memory is available on the designated NUMA node at some moment. In this case, global OOM event will be occurred while reserved memory is being requested by the proper container then preempted reserved memory will be retrieved by termination of container(s) in non Guaranteed QoS Pod. Consequently, the reserved memory will be allocated to the proper container. Termenated containers are expected to restart depends on its `restartPolicy`.
```

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer: I think in this case we expect that the OOM mechanism will kill `burstable/best-effort` containers, once the NUMA node does not have enough memory, but if we will pin their memory, we always will get killed containers.

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer: > For more detail, the Memory Manager doesn't track any memory usage of containers.
> Indeed, it doesn't take account of containers in non-guaranteed QoS Pod.

Can you please clarify this one, what will happen in case of node or kubelet restart, how will we know how much memory already allocated from some specific node for guaranteed pods?

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Author: @cynepco3hahue 
hm, I haven't testes kubelet restart case.

`how will we know how much memory already allocated from some specific node for guaranteed pods?`
=> Well, When I performed PoC last year, my team implemented 'state' for Memory Manager.
Once MM stored the reserved amount of memory in `state`, contents are written in a file so that we can save the information of memory even if kubelet is restarted.

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Author: @klihub
Um... your algorithm, it feels like the same version of the graph algorithm of intel's work, right?
https://github.com/intel/cri-resource-manager

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Author: @cbf123
```
I think we need to prevent burstable/best-effort containers from consuming memory from multiple NUMA nodes.
```
I have thought about it, but it feels like "let's schedule burstable/best-effort pod together".
At least Guaranteed QoS Pod has the same amount of request and limitation for memory.
But, burstable can omit the limitation of memory.
And besteffort can also omit the reqeust of memory.
How we can schedule them to a specific NUMA node? 

```
Its the only way for us to guarantee that there's enough memory available on a given NUMA node to satisfy a high-performance container that needs single-numa-node alignment.
```
=> No, we can kill them(besteffort and burstable) to get free pages.
(Oh it feels like a psychopath.)
Once a container is killed by oom, it can restart(if restart policy allows it) and take pages from another NUMA node.

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer 2: You make a good point that best-effort/burstable pods don't even have to specify how much memory they might use, which kind of makes it impossible to put a cap on their memory usage in the first place.

I guess the OOM killer would work, as long as the high-performance container allocates all of its memory up-front rather than during high-performance operations (which would be good practice anyway).

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer 3: > @klihub
> Um... your algorithm, it feels like the same version of the graph algorithm of intel's work, right?
> https://github.com/intel/cri-resource-manager
> 
> If your approach makes sense and doable, maybe we can implement it as a different policy that supports cross NUMA affinity in beta.

We don't have this algorithm implemented for memory allocation ATM.

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer: > Once MM stored the reserved amount of memory in `state`, contents are written in a file so that we can save the information of memory even if kubelet is restarted.

It what I expected, can you please add it under the KEP?

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer 4: > a maximally pessimistic accounting algorithm
@klihub Could you provide some presentation or some other resources on "a maximally pessimistic accounting algorithm" that you consider for the memory management?

> - To provide memory and hugepages topology hint to the Topology Manager. It will allow Topology Manager to allocate memory, hugepages, CPUs, and PCI devices on the same NUMA node.

Reviewer 3: Is this really a goal ? To me sounds more like one way to achieve the previously mentioned goal of 'isolation of memory and hugepages to a single NUMA node'.

### Story 2 : Database

- Databases(Oracle, PostgreSQL, MySQL, MongoDB, SAP) consumes massive Memory and Hugepages, in order to reduce memory access latency and improve performance dramatically resources(CPU, Memory, Hugepages, I/O Devices) should be aligned.

# Proposal

## Proposed Changes

### New Component: Memory Manager

Memory Manager is a new component of Kubelet and a new hint provider of Topology Manager for memory and hugepage. It provides NUMA node affinity to the Topology Manager to guarantee NUMA aware memory consumption for a container in the Guaranteed QoS Pod.

> When Guaranteed QoS Pod admission is requested to kubelet, Topology Manager asks NUMA node affinity of memory and hugepage to Memory Manager. Then Memory Manager calculates NUMA node affinity based on internal database(`Memory Map`) and sends the affinity back to the Topology Manager to help the Topology Manager to figure out appropriate NUMA node where adequate resources are available for a given container.

Reviewer 5: typos: 
- requested to kubelet -> requested from kubelet
- asks ... to Memory Manager -> asks ... from Memory Manager

Note:

> - Memory Manager only support single NUMA node affinity, because Linux kernel doesn`t have such mechanism to reserve memory or set memory limit per NUMA node.

Reviewer 5: Memory Manager only support**s**

> - Memory Manager only support single NUMA node affinity, because Linux kernel doesn`t have such mechanism to reserve memory or set memory limit per NUMA node.

Reviewer 5: Can you elaborate on this Linux kernel restriction a little bit more?

Author: I'm thinking about it to add kernel restriction as a part of the appendix.
Just like `How kernel allocates memory and bind physical pages`.

> Then, while the container is being deployed, Memory Manager reserves requested amount of memory on the internal database(`Memory Map`). Then it sets [CPUSET enforcement](#cpuset-enforcement) to consume memory from designated NUMA node, that Topology Manager selected.

Reviewer: Can you please specify when should the manager pin `cpuset.mem` to te specific NUMA node, I think it makes sense to pin only in case when you already have CPU pinning, it means:
- CPU manager policy set to `static`
- container CPU and request limit equals and has an integer value

Reviewer 2: Certainly I'd expect the most important high-performance use-case to be where we have CPU, PCI device, and memory/hugepages all coming from the same host NUMA node.

Reviewer: I agree, and it will be done via topology hints, I just unsure when we should pin pod memory to the specific NUMA node, we should not do it for every pod.

Author: `To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers in the Guaranteed Pod.`

Basically, Memory Manager will pin a memory when a Pod has guaranteed QoS, it means MM wil lpina memory for all containers in a Guaranteed QoS Pod.

Reviewer: Hm, but if do not pin the CPU what the point to pin the memory?

Author: My additional plan is :
- adding new CPU Policy which supports NUMA aware cpu sharing. 
- adding new Topology Policy which support pod level single numa alignment.
(I`m not sure I will add pod-level-single-numa-policy.go literally or add new Policy using CRD to dsicribe the requirement of Pod resourcd topology and the level of topology such as {single-numa, container}, {single-numa, pod})

Author: `Hm, but if do not pin the CPU what the point to pin the memory?`
=> Once Memory Manager provides a hint for memory, topolgoy manager will determine the NUMA node(point) under configured policy.

Reviewer: What about the case, when you have a container which requests a shared CPUs in the pod which has guaranteed QoS and does not have requests for other PCI devices, will you pin it memory anyway? It can always choose NUMA node 0 for example and it will bring NUMA node 0 to be exhausted.

Author: hm, your example also make sence when we use static policy of cpu manager.
But adding a dedicate logic per cpu policy on Memory Manager also doesnt make sence.

My goal in this year is very simple.
Making all containers in a pod(has Guaranteed QoS)  comsumes compute resource from a single NUMA node.
compute resources includes: exlusive cpu, shared cpu, memory, hugepage, nic, gpu, fpga, etc

Reviewer 2: If you care about performance then all resources should be NUMA-aligned.  If you don't care about performance then it doesn't matter.

This is why I think that NUMA-alignment should be an attribute of the Pod (or even the container) and not the node.

That said, in order to properly track per-NUMA-node resources you can't have anything that "floats" across the whole node consuming resources unexpectedly from both NUMA nodes.   The prime example of this is non-hugepage memory.  By default Linux will allocate memory on the NUMA node that the request was made from...if a container can run on CPUs from both NUMA nodes then it can potentially allocate memory from both NUMA nodes, which makes it impossible to track how much memory is available for Kubernetes on each NUMA node.

Reviewer 3: > This is why I think that NUMA-alignment requirements should be an attribute of the Pod (or even the container) and not the node.

+1

Memory Manager guarantees that the managed container can consume reserved memory on the designated NUMA node. For this, Memory Manager depends on [OOM score enforcement](#oom-score-enforcement) of Kubelet.

> Consequently, user can expect Topology Manager(with single-numa-node policy) coordinates compute resources along with memory, hugepage to the same NUMA node.

Author: `single-numa-node mode is a requirement for the Memory Manager?`
=> nope, I just add that phrase to help readers to get my idea clearly.

Memory Manager is just one of the hint providers.
It doesn't have any depencency with any specific topology policy.

> Consequently, user can expect Topology Manager(with single-numa-node policy) coordinates compute resources along with memory, hugepage to the same NUMA node.

Reviewer 5: Can you explain how it would work with the 'best effort' policy?

More details of this component are listed below.

#### The Concept of Memory Map

The Memory Manager has internal database(`Memory Map`), it is used to calcuate NUMA node affinity and store the information of reserved memory. Memory Manager perceives conventional memory and each hugepage size as different memory type to calculate topology hint precisely.

- For an example, on the node which has hugepages-1Gbi and hugepages-2Mi, the number of memory type will be three : conventional memory, hugepages-1Gi, hugepages-2Mi.

The Memory Map is the collection of Memory Table for each NUMA node and memory type. Memory Manager generates this Memory Map on its initialize sequence.
Below figures show how memory map is consisted, in golang style.

```go
Type MemoryTable struct {
    TotalMemSize uint64
    PreReserved  uint64
    Allocatable  uint64
    Reserved     uint64
    Free         uint64
}

type MemoryMap map[NUMBER_OF_NUMA_NODES]map[MEMORY_TYPES]MemoryTable
```
_Figure: The construction of memory map._

> - For a brief example, on a two-socket machine with one size of pre-allocated hugepages, Memory Manager will generates four memory tables(two of NUMA nodes * two of memory types).

Reviewer 3: Do you implicitly or explicitly assume that the underlying hardware always runs with sub-NUMA clustering disabled (IOW that it looks like there was only one NUMA node per socket) ?

Author: I thought there will be no issue from SBC
As I know only platinum line support SNC isnt it?
and, once it enabled on bios, kernel exposes two(right?) NUMA node per socket with different NUMA index.

Memory Manager will be dealing with NUMA node index that parsed from cAdvisor.
If SNC is enabled, MM will perceive two NUMA nodes from one socket.

Reviewer 3: > I thought there will be no issue from SBC
> As I know only platinum line support SNC isnt it?
> and, once it enabled on bios, kernel exposes two(right?) NUMA node per socket with different NUMA index.
> 
> Memory Manager will be dealing with NUMA node index that parsed from cAdvisor.
> If SNC is enabled, MM will perceive two NUMA nodes from one socket.

I didn't try to imply there would be problems, I just wanted to know whether you have a 1 node / socket assumption or not.

Reviewer 2: Linux will present it as two NUMA nodes, and as far as I know Kubernetes only cares about NUMA nodes and not physical sockets.

> - For a brief example, on a two-socket machine with one size of pre-allocated hugepages, Memory Manager will generates four memory tables(two of NUMA nodes * two of memory types).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- For a brief example, on a two-socket machine with one size of pre-allocated hugepages, Memory Manager will generate four memory tables(2 sockets * 1 NUMA node / socket * two memory types) if SNC(sub-NUMA clustering) is disabled and eight memory tables (2 sockets * 2 NUMA node / socket * two memory types) if SNC is enabled.
```

Reviewer 5: > If SNC is enabled, Memory Manager will detect two NUMA nodes from one socket as well.

Exactly! And this would make your above statement incorrect as you'd need 8 tables instead of 4 to handle this.

If you don't want to mention SNC you can just mention amount of NUMA nodes per socket.

Author: Ok I got your main point :)
I think mentioning only amount of NUMA nodes per socket is better

Author: `If SNC is enabled, Memory Manager will detect two NUMA nodes from one socket as well.`
added

NOTE:
- The number of memory types on the node varies by the configuration of pre-allocated hugepages on the node.

#### Computing NUMA node affinity

Memory Manager calculates topology hint of conventional memory and each hugepage size for the containers in Guaranteed QoS Pod. The topology hint is also known as NUMA node affinity which represents the NUMA node that has enough capacity of memory for requested memory type. 

Memory Manager refers `Memory Map` to find out all NUMA nodes which has available memory for given memory type. Then it returns found NUMA nodes as topology hints. Here each topology hint maps to each NUMA node.

- Here is brief example for two socket machine.
  - A Pod requests 2Gi of memory and 1Gi of hugepages-1Gi.
  - Memory Manager found NUMA node 0 has enough memory and hugepage but NUAM node 1 doesn't so that calculated NUMA node affinity is NUMA node 0.
  - Memory Manager returns the topology hint 

#### The configuration of Memory Manager

The Node Allocatable memory of Node Allocatable Feature is calculated by following fomula:

> - [Node-Allocatable] = [Node-Capacity] - [Kube-Reserved] - [System-Reserved] - [Eviction-Threshold]

Reviewer: Should we also take into account pods that already started with `Guaranteed` QoS and was pinned to the specific NUMA node?

The Node Allocatable is exposed to API server as part of `v1.Node` object and referred by scheduler to select appropriate worker node to bind a Pod.

> Configuring Memory Manager is important, Memory Manager assumes that components in kube/system-reserved comsumes memory from Pre Reserved Zone so that total amount of Pre Reserved Zone for every NUMA node and memory type should be identical to sum of `Kube-Reserved`, `System-Reserved` and `Eviction-Threshold`.

Reviewer: Can we just sum `Kube-Reserved`, `System-Reserved` and `Eviction-Threshold` and divide it by a number of NUMA nodes, without introducing a new kubelet argument?

Reviewer 2: What about the case where we might want different amounts of reserved memory on different host NUMA nodes?  (Maybe all the NICs are on NUMA node 1, so we put all the housekeeping host stuff on NUMA node 0.)

Reviewer: Yes, it makes sense, but can we rename it to something more explicit, like `--reservation-per-numa-node`

Nevertheless, this indenticality doesn't always guarantee success of Pod binding with single NUMA memory affinity. In some cases, a node may satisfies memory request of a Pod across NUMA nodes, but particular NUMA nodes may not have adequate memory for given container in a Pod. In these cases, Memory Manager will not provide any topology hint to the Topology Manager.

Following feature gate and flag is used to config Memory Manager:
- Feature Gate: --feature-gate=MemoryManager=true
- Kubelet Flag: --pre-reserved-zone=[memory-type=string, numa-node=int, limit=string][,][...]

As described in Memory Map section, the size of Pre Reserved Zone and Allocatable Zone are determined by the configuration of Memory Manager. Administrators are expected to have high confidence in the configuration of `--pre-reserved-zone` flag.
As mentioned above, This feature will provide basic validation of configuration for administrators.

NOTE:

> - For hugepages, at the moment(v1.17), Node Allocateble features does not support reserving hugepages, so that Memory Manager will not have Pre Reserved Zone for hugepages. Once Node Allocatable feature will support hugepages reservation(#83541), Pre Reserved Zone for hugapages will works in the same manner of conventional memory.

Reviewer 5: typo: will works -> will work

Reviewer 5: Node Allocateble features does -> Node Allocatable feature does

#### OOM Score Enforcement

> The fundamental idea of this feature depends on OOM score enforcement of Kubelet. Kubelet enforces different `oom_score_adj` values for each QoS Class of Pod. Kubelet sets the value of high priority(`-998`) for Guaranteed QoS Class Pod. It protects the containers from global OOM event while the containers consumes on designated NUMA node.

Reviewer 5: containers consumes -> containers consume

Based on `OOM score enforcement`, Memory Manager makes strong assumption that certain amount of reserved memory shall be available on the designated NUMA node.

> However, some containers ,which in the non Guaranteed Pod which has the `oom_score_adj` value of low priority(`2~1000`), may consumes some reserved memory and makes no more memory is available on the designated NUMA node at some moment. In this case, global OOM event will be occurred while reserved memory is being requested by the proper container then preempted reserved memory will be retrieved by termination of container(s) in non Guaranteed QoS Pod. Consequently, the reserved memory will be allocated to the proper container. Termenated containers are expected to restart depends on its `restartPolicy`.

Reviewer: typo: `Termenated` -> `Terminated`

Reviewer 5: may consumes -> may consume

       |                              |                             |
       |                              +-+----------+                |
       |                              | |          |Hint Merging &  |
       |                              +-+<---------+Decide Admission|
       |      admit or reject Pod     |                             |
       +<-----------------------------+                             |
       |                              |                             |
       +                              +                             +

```
_Figure: The sequence of Pod admission in Kubelet._

Detailedly, to get an information that a resource that container requests is available or not, Topology Manager talks to other managers like CPU Manager and Device Manager, called _hint providers_, which can give the needed information of CPU cores and PCIe peripherals like NIC and GPU, respectively, in each NUMA node. Once collecting all the hints in each NUMA node from the managers, then Topology Manager finally determines which NUMA node's resources in a host can be allocatable for the requested container.

> However, the problem raising by this KEP is that there is no hint provider which can give a hint for memory and hugepages resources. That is, Topology Manager could not determine NUMA-aware resource allocation in best way due to absence of memory-related information, which causes inter-node commucation overhead among CPU, memory, and PCIe devices and leads overall performance degradation of containers.

Reviewer 5: commucation -> communication

Author: Done

To resolve the problem, Memory Manager is proposed in this KEP to provide a way to guarantee NUMA affinity of memory as well as other resources (i.e., CPU and PCIe peripherals) in a procedure of container deployment.

# Motivation

## Related Features

> - [Topology Manager][topology-manager] is a feature that collects topology hints from various hint providers (e.g., CPU Manager and Device Manager) to calculate which NUMA node can give a requested amount of resources for a container. With this calculated hints, Topology Manager also refers to node topology policy (i.e. _burstable, restricted, single-numa-policy_) and NUMA affinity of containers, and then it finally determines if container in a pod can be deployed onto the host machine.

Reviewer 5: According to the [Control Topology Management Policies on a node](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/topology-manager/) document there is no burstable topology policy. Available policies are: none, best-effort, restricted and single-numa-policy. burstable is a QoS class AFAIR.

Author: `burstable topology policy`, I think it is just stupid mistake :(

Author: I will update later

- [Device Manager][device-manager] is a feature that device vendors can advertise their device resources like NIC and GPU devices through their own device-plugins so that kubelet can discover the devices to be used by containers. And also, Device Manager can give a hint of corresponding device's availability in NUMA nodes to Topology Manager.

- [Hugepages][hugepages] is a feature to assign pre-allocated hugepage resources to a container if requested.

- [Node Allocatable Feature][node-allocatable-feature] is a feature that helps to reserve compute resources to isolate whole resources on a host by certain purpose. For example, by this feature, kube-reserved and system-reserved can be defined to reserve resources for kubelet and system (i.e. OS kernel), respectively. In release 1.17, the feature supports following reservable resources: CPU, memory, and ephemeral storage.

## Related issues

- [Hardware topology awareness at node level (including NUMA)][numa-issue]
- [Support Container Isolation of Hugepages][hugepage-issue]
- [Support isolating memory to single NUMA node][memory-issue]

## Goals

> - To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to single NUMA node for containers belonging to the Guaranteed Pod.

Reviewer 5: I believe we don't need to emphasise single NUMA allocations. It's just one of possible topology manager policies. We need to make this goal more generic, e.g. "To guarantee isolation of memory and hugepages to a minimal set of NUMA nodes" or something similar.

Reviewer 4: Okay, at this point of document, it might be even more suitable to generalize, so I applied your suggestion.
But, I would opt to keep the terms single-NUMA and multi-NUMA for a variety of reasons (e.g. the Linux kernel does not support  multi-NUMA guaranteed memory allocation).

- To provide topology hint of memory and hugepage resources to the Topology Manager, which will allow Topology Manager to allocate memory, hugepages, CPUs, and PCI devices on the same NUMA node.

## Non-Goals

- Supporting cross-NUMA affinity is out of scope.

- Isolating memory & hugepages to a NUMA node for multiple containers is out of scope.

- Updating K8s scheduler and Pod spec is out of scope at this point.

- This proposal only focuses on Linux based systems.

## User Stories

### Story 1 : Networking Acceleration using DPDK

> - The system such as real-time trading system and 5G system, which requires networking acceleration, uses DPDK to guarantee low latency of packet processing. DPDK (Data Plane Development Kit) is set of libraries to accelerate packet processing on userspace. DPDK requires dedicated resources (such as exclusive CPU, hugepages, and DPDK-compatile Network Interface Card) and alignment of resources to sigle NUMA node to prevent unexpected performance degradation due to inter-node communication overhead. For this reason, there should be a way to guarantee a resource reservation of memory and hugepage as well as other computing resources (e.g., CPU core and NIC) from a single NUMA node for DPDK-based containers.

Reviewer 5: DPDK-compatile -> DPDK-compatible

Author: Done

### Story 2 : Database

- Databases (e.g., Oracle, PostgreSQL, and MySQL) require lots of memory and hugepages resource intensively to access a massive volume of data. To reduce memory access latency and improve its performance dramatically, all resources (CPU core, memory, hugepages, and I/O devices) should be aligned to a single NUMA node.

# Proposal

## Proposed Changes

### New Component: Memory Manager

Memory Manager is a proposed component of Kubelet which is a new hint provider of Topology Manager especially for memory and hugepage. It provides NUMA affinity to Topology Manager to guarantee NUMA-aware memory consumption for a container which especially belongs to Guaranteed QoS Pod.

> When Guaranteed QoS Pod admission is requested from kubelet, Topology Manager asks NUMA affinity of memory and hugepage from Memory Manager. For each container in the Pod, Memory Manager calculates NUMA affinity based on its internal database (i.e. `Memory Map`) which stores a usage of memory and hugepage resource for already-deployed containers. And then, it sends the affinity back to the Topology Manager to help Topology Manager to figure out appropriate NUMA node where adequate resources are available. This calculation is performed for all containers in the Pod and if none of containers is rejected, the Pod is finally admitted to be deployed.

Reviewer 5: > Topology Manager asks NUMA affinity of memory and hugepage from Memory Manager

Strictly speaking NUMA affinity is not the same as topology hint. topology hint includes NUMA affinity, but it also includes other information and may be extended in future. So, I'd propose to use 'topology hint' instead of 'NUMA affinity' here.

Note:

> - Memory Manager only supports single NUMA affinity, because Linux kernel does not have such a mechanism to reserve memory or set memory limit per NUMA node.

Reviewer 6: Does this mean that Memory Manager can only support the `single-numa-node` Topology Manager policy? If so, this could cause confusion to the user - (The user could make a reasonable assumption that Memory Manager behaves like other hint providers under `best-effort` and `restricted` policies).

> In deployment phase, Memory Manager updates its `Memory Map` on an amount of memory and hugepages as much as a container requests. After that, Memory Manager enforces a consumption of memory and hugepage for the container to a specific NUMA node which Topology Manager selected, by seting [CPUSET enforcement](#cpuset-enforcement). Note that containers of Guaruanteed Pod of which Mamory Manager takes care are guaranteed to consume allocated memory and hugepages on the designated NUMA node while other Pods are deployed later, by utilizing [OOM score enforcement](#oom-score-enforcement) system of Kubelet.

Reviewer 5: Guaruanteed -> Guaranteed

Reviewer 5: Mamory Manager -> Memory Manager

Author: Done

  PreReserved  uint64
  Allocatable  uint64
  Reserved     uint64
  Free         uint64
}

type MemoryMap map[NUMA_NODE_INDEX]map[MEMORY_TYPES]MemoryTable
```
_Figure: The construction of Memory Table and Memory Map._

- For a brief example, on a two-socket machine with one size of pre-allocated hugepages, Memory Manager will generate four memory tables (two of NUMA nodes * two of memory types including a conventional memory type).

`Memory Table` is proposed to represent amount of pre-reserved and allocatable memory for a certain memory type on a certain NUMA node. The table consists of _Pre-reserved Zone_ and _Allocatable Zone_. The following figure shows the structure of `Memory Table`, briefly.

```
+-------------------+------------+--------------+
|                   |     Allocatable Zone      |
+ Pre-reserved Zone +------------+--------------+
|                   |  Reserved  |     Free     |
+-------------------+------------+--------------+
```
_Figure: The construction of Memory Table._

The size of the two zones (_Pre-reserved Zone_ and _Allocatable Zone_) are pre-configured in kubelet configuration by administrator and are immutable values in runtime.

> - _Pre-reserved Zone_ indicates the certain amount of memory which is pre-reserved for system such as kernel, OS deamon, and core components of kubernetes like kubelet. For more details how to configure this size, see [The configuration of Memory Manager](#the-configuration-of-memory-manager) section.

Reviewer 5: OS deamon -> OS daemon

Author: Done

- _Allocatable Zone_ indicates the total size of allocatable memory for containers in Guaranteed QoS Pod. The size of this zone is simply the rest of  _Pre-reserved Zone_ from the total size of the Memory Table.

- _Reserved_ section of _Allocatable Zone_ indicates the total size of reserved memory for already-deployed containers in Guaranteed QoS Pods. The Guaranteed memory of certain container is taken from Free memory section.

- _Free_ section of _Allocatable Zone_ indicates a free memory for new containers in a Guaranteed QoS Pod. When a new container is deployed, _Free_ memory is subtracted by the requested memory size of the container. And when a running container is terminated, the requested memory size of the container is returned to _Free_ memory.

#### Computing NUMA affinity

> Memory Manager calculates a topology hint for a container in Guaranteed QoS Pod for conventional memory and hugepages of all sizes. The topology hint is well known as _NUMA affinity_ which represents a possible NUMA node that has enough capacity of required memory for all memory types.

Reviewer 5: the same here. topology hint is not the same as NUMA affinity.

Reviewer 7: They are currently one and the same, but I agree, we should not think of the Hint as just the affinity. The affinity is just one part of the overall hint.

> To generate a NUMA affinity for a container, Memory Manager refers to `Memory Map` and decides if _Free_ memory of _Allocatable Zone_ for all memory types from each NUMA node is enough to assign for the container. After collecting _NUMA affinity_ for each NUMA node from the pespective of memory, Memory Manager merges them to a topology hint and send it back to Topology Manager.

Reviewer 5: pespective -> perspective

Author: Done

- Here is a brief example for two socket machine.
  - A Pod requests 2Gi of memory and 1 hugepages-1Gi.
  - Memory Manager found that NUMA node #0 has enough memory and hugepage but NUMA node #1 does not so that the calculated NUMA affinity is NUMA node #0.
  - Memory Manager returns the result as a topology hint with NUMA node #0.

#### The configuration of Memory Manager

> The Node Allocatable memory of Node Allocatable Feature is calculated by following fomula:

Reviewer 5: fomula -> formula

Author: Done

- [Node-Allocatable] = [Node-Capacity] - [Kube-Reserved] - [System-Reserved] - [Eviction-Threshold]

The Node Allocatable is exposed to API server as part of `v1.Node` object and referred by scheduler to select appropriate worker node to bind a Pod.

> Configuring Memory Manager is important, Memory Manager assumes that components in kube/system-reserved comsumes memory from Pre Reserved Zone so that total amount of Pre Reserved Zone for every NUMA node and memory type should be identical to sum of `Kube-Reserved`, `System-Reserved` and `Eviction-Threshold`.

Reviewer 5: comsumes -> consume

Author: Done

Nevertheless, this indenticality doesn't always guarantee success of Pod binding with single NUMA memory affinity. In some cases, a node may satisfies memory request of a Pod across NUMA nodes, but particular NUMA nodes may not have adequate memory for given container in a Pod. In these cases, Memory Manager will not provide any topology hint to the Topology Manager.

Following feature gate and flag is used to config Memory Manager:
- Feature Gate: --feature-gate=MemoryManager=true
- Kubelet Flag: --pre-reserved-zone=[{numa-node=int, memory-type=string, limit=string}][,][...]

As described in Memory Map section, the size of Pre Reserved Zone and Allocatable Zone are determined by the configuration of Memory Manager. Administrators are expected to have high confidence in the configuration of `--pre-reserved-zone` flag.
As mentioned above, This feature will provide basic validation of configuration for administrators.

NOTE:

> - For hugepages, at the moment(v1.17), Node Allocateble feature does not support reserving hugepages, so that Memory Manager will not have Pre Reserved Zone for hugepages. Once Node Allocatable feature will support hugepages reservation(#83541), Pre Reserved Zone for hugapages will work in the same manner of conventional memory.

Reviewer 5: hugapages -> hugepages

Author: Done

- [ ] Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

## Summary

The *Memory Manager* is a new component in *kubelet* ecosystem proposed to enable the feature of guaranteed memory (and hugepages) allocation for pods in Guaranteed QoS class. The feature offers a couple of allocation strategies. The first one, the *single-NUMA* strategy, is intended for high-performance and performance-sensitive applications. Relevant user stories are illustrated in here for the *single-NUMA* strategy. The second one, the *multi-NUMA* strategy, complements the overall design while it overcomes the situation that cannot be managed with the *single-NUMA* strategy. Namely, whenever the amount of memory demanded by a pod is in the excess of a single NUMA node capacity, the guaranteed memory is provisioned across multiple NUMA nodes with the *multi-NUMA* strategy.  

> In both scenarios, the *Memory Manager* employs hint generation protocol to yield the most suitable NUMA affinity for a pod, and it feeds the central manager (*Topology Manager*) with those affinity hints. Moreover, *Memory Manager* ensures that the memory, which a pod requests, is allocated from a minimum number of NUMA nodes.

Reviewer 2: The commas in "memory, which a pod requests, is" are both unnecessary.

Reviewer 4: Done.

## Motivation

### Goals

- Offer guaranteed memory (and hugepages) allocation over a minimum number of NUMA nodes for containers (within a pod). 

- Guaranteeing the affinity of memory and hugepages to the same NUMA node for the whole group of containers (within a pod). This is a long-term goal which will be achieved along with PR [#1752](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1752) and the implementation of `hintprovider.GetPodLevelTopologyHints()` API in the *Memory Manager*.  

### Non-Goals

- Both the upgrade of K8S scheduler and further extension of the official pod specification are out of scope.

- This proposal confines to the family of Linux operating systems.

## Proposal

The *Memory Manager* is a new component of _kubelet_ ecosystem proposed to enable single-NUMA and multi-NUMA guaranteed memory allocation. Besides:
- *Memory Manager* is also a new hint provider for _Topology Manager_;

> - The hints are intended to indicate preferred memory (and hugepages) affinity which pins the memory for a container either to a single or a group of NUMA nodes;

Reviewer 2: Arguably you're not pinning the memory to a NUMA node, but rather allocating memory from a NUMA node.

- By design, *Memory Manager* offers guaranteed memory allocation for pods in Guaranteed QoS class.

The next subsection introduces to the proposal by outlining its design. 

### Design Overview

![alt text](./mm_tm_diagram.png)

> Once *kubelet* requests a guaranteed QoS pod admission, as shown in the figure above, *Topology Manager* queries *Memory Manager* about the preferred NUMA affinity for memory and hugepages, for all containers in a pod. For each container in a pod, *Memory Manager* calculates the affinity using its internal database, namely the `Node Map`. The `Node Map` is an object which is responsible for tracking the utilization of memory (and hugepages) for all containers in Guaranteed QoS class. 

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to talk about hugepages separate from memory?  You could just track page size and number of pages and it would be generic.

Reviewer: We use exactly the same logic for hugepages calculation and hugepages NUMA node allocation affected as well by `cpuset.mems`, so I do not think we need to talk separately about memory and hugepages.

#### Story 2 : Databases

- Databases (e.g., Oracle, PostgreSQL, and MySQL) require relatively extensive amount of memory and hugepages to access massive volumes of data relatively efficiently. In order to reduce the latency caused by cross-NUMA memory access and sharing, all resources (CPU cores, memory, hugepages, and I/O devices) should be aligned to the same single NUMA node. This will serve the stability and performance enhancement significantly.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal and how do we mitigate.  Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed and by whom?

Consider including folks that also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

#### UX

To increase the UX, the number of new kubelet flags was minimized to a minimum.
The minimum set of kubelet flags, which is necessary to configure the Memory Manger, is presented in [this](#new-flags-and-configuration-of-the-memory-manager) section.

## Design Details 

### How to enable the guaranteed memory allocation over many NUMA nodes?

> The Linux kernel does not support multi-NUMA memory allocation (pinning), to the best of our knowledge, and thus, we assumed that we have to wait for a suitable upgrade in the Linux kernel so as to adopt multi-NUMA memory allocation (pinning) strategy in the *Memory Manager*. However, the community urged us to implement multi-NUMA strategy as something that is really necessary. In fact, we come up with a simple concept and design for multi-NUMA memory allocation (pinning), which allows for guaranteed memory allocation over many NUMA nodes. The main idea is to treat a group of NUMA nodes as an independent unit, and manage those independent units right by the *Memory Manager*.

Reviewer 2: Could you elaborate on what you mean by "The Linux kernel does not support multi-NUMA memory allocation (pinning)"?  /sys/fs/cgroup/cpuset/<path>/cpuset.mems allows you to specify "0-1" to indicate that processes in that cgroup are allowed to allocate memory from NUMA nodes 0 and 1.

Reviewer: > Is the issue that there's no way to know how much memory would be allocated from each NUMA node? If so then I think the sentence should be reworded to reflect that the problem is in the accounting, not the allocation.

Yes, you are absolutely right!

```go
// MemoryTable contains memory information
type MemoryTable struct {
	TotalMemSize   uint64 `json:"total"`
	SystemReserved uint64 `json:"systemReserved"`
	Allocatable    uint64 `json:"allocatable"`
	Reserved       uint64 `json:"reserved"`
	Free           uint64 `json:"free"`
}

// NodeState contains NUMA node related information
type NodeState struct {
	// NumberOfAssignments contains a number memory assignments from this node
	// When the container requires memory and hugepages it will increase number of assignments by two
	NumberOfAssignments int `json:"numberOfAssignments"`
	// MemoryTable contains NUMA node memory related information
	MemoryMap map[v1.ResourceName]*MemoryTable `json:"memoryMap"`
	// NodeGroups contains NUMA nodes that current NUMA node in group with them
	// It means that we have container that pinned to the current NUMA node and all group nodes
	Nodes []int `json:"nodes"`
}

// NodeMap contains memory information for each NUMA node.
type NodeMap map[int]*NodeState
```

> For instance, consider a two-socket machine with only one size of hugepages pre-allocated. In this case, *Memory Manager* instatiates four memory tables (`[ two NUMA nodes ] * [ two  memory types ]`) on start-up. Notice that on a single-socket machine, and in the case when sub-NUMA cluster (SNC) feature is enabled in hardware, *Memory Manager* can detect two NUMA nodes although, as already mentioned, the machine features a single socket.

Reviewer 2: I thought that with sub-NUMA clustering the cores/cache in a socket are split in two, maybe with each cluster getting its own memory controller.  So any given core is only associated with a single NUMA node at at time.

As you say though it's only one of a number of things that might cause there to be multiple NUMA nodes on a single socket.  It might make sense to reword the last sentence as something like:

"Notice that on a single-socket machine there are scenarios (such as the case when sub-NUMA cluster (SNC) feature is enabled in hardware) where *Memory Manager* can detect two NUMA nodes although the machine features a single socket."

> For instance, consider a two-socket machine with only one size of hugepages pre-allocated. In this case, *Memory Manager* instatiates four memory tables (`[ two NUMA nodes ] * [ two  memory types ]`) on start-up. Notice that on a single-socket machine, and in the case when sub-NUMA cluster (SNC) feature is enabled in hardware, *Memory Manager* can detect two NUMA nodes although, as already mentioned, the machine features a single socket.

Reviewer 4: From [1]:

> Cluster-on-die (COD) and sub-NUMA-Cluster (SNC) are technologies where a physical NUMA node is further split into separate NUMA domains, taking advantage of multiple memory controllers per physical CPU socket. COD and SNC improve the performance of highly NUMA optimized workloads.

> These settings are not directly detectable from Linux user space. However, we can detect the number of NUMA nodes and number of physical IDs of CPUs. If the number of NUMA nodes is greater than the number of physical IDs, it is likely that COD/SNC is enabled. There are corner cases like numa emulation (which isn't likely be used in a k8s cluster).

From [3]:
> What SNC does is divide the silicon at a firmware level into two ‘clusters’, with each cluster having a preference for working with the cores, nodes, and memory controllers within its own cluster. There is nothing stopping it going outside its own cluster, but to offer the best latency (sometimes at the expense of peak bandwidth), it is best for each core/node to be limited in this way.

From [2], an example of latency in a two-socket machine with SNC enabled (from the lowest latency to the highest):
1. "within one zone is ~68ns" (CPU access the most local memory, I guess)
2. "Within one die ~75ns"
3. "Between dies, it is ~125ns, almost eliminating difference between zones within remote die"
4. "Going to another socket ~135ns (again, laws of physics, the distance of signal travelling)."

It seems that it's all about distances, i.e.: shorter distance => lower latency => higher performance (more effective utilization of CPU since waiting for memory is shorter).

It was reworded to:
> Notice that on modern architectures, a single socket, i.e., a physical NUMA node, can be further split into a number of logical NUMA nodes, which is done to further improve the performance. For this purpose, Intel offers machines with Sub-NUMA Clustering (SNC, an upgraded version of Cluster-On-Die) feature, and AMD offers mchines with NUMA Nodes per Socket (NPS) feature. In such a scenario where SNC or NPS is enabled on a machine, a K8S node and the *Memory Manager* can detect and be aware of many NUMA nodes, although the machine features a single socket (a single physical NUMA node).

@klueska @cbf123 Can you recall other scenarios beside SNC/NPS and "numa emulation (which isn't likely be used in a k8s cluster)"? (not crucial to know just can be interesting)
  

[1] https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-feature-discovery/issues/143
[2] slides 10-11, https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/14Hk7uAuhpIACrUmPXFwedwy2TRzdvPJt6OQVNy_WHGE/edit?usp=sharing
[3] https://www.anandtech.com/show/12409/intel-launches-xeon-d-2100-series-socs-edge/4

![alt text](./mem_tables_runtime.png)

However, if **Out-of-Memory** (OOM) situation occurs, i.e., a particular memory limit is reached and crossed (e.g. by the containers) within _K8S_ node, the node triggers one of [the mechanisms](#kubernetes-nodes-memory-management-mechanisms-and-their-relation-to-the-memory-manager). Depending on what a particular limit is crossed (`cgroups` memory limit, `hard-eviction-treshold` memory limit, etc.), a suitable mechanism becomes triggered accordingly. As already noticed, such an OOM situation is handled by *kubelet* or system (OOM kernel killer) and not by *Memory Manager* itself. 

### Simulation - how the Memory Manager works? (by examples)

In this section, a number of slides is intended to illustrate the operation of the Memory Manager in various situations, i.e., to show how the pods in different QoS classes (Guaranteed, BestEffort/Burstable) are handled by the Memory Manager or other means, and how the disjoint groups of NUMA nodes are dynamically managed (created or removed) by the Memory Manager.  

> ![alt text](./mm_simulation.jpg)

Reviewer 7: It's hard to comment on these individual slides since they are not inline with the text. In any case.

*For the slide titled "Reject Pod2":*
The way it's presented here makes it seems strange that you wouldn't want to allocate memory from this group (since the actual memory allocated to the pod would in fact come from a single NUMA node in this example). The issue would be better demonstrated if the 5GB to service this pod was only available as (e.g.) 2GB from node 0 and 3GB from node 1.  This should clearly be rejected because the memory is coming from 2 different NUMA nodes, when waiting to service the pod frtom a different node (or waiting until this node emptied out) would let it be serviced from just 1 NUMA node. Not sure how or if you want to clear this up, but that is the main reasoning behind this.

Reviewer 4: The slide _"Reject Pod2"_ looks how it looks because it depicts a standard procedure, i.e.:
1. Memory Manager finds out from which NUMA nodes a pod should allocate memory, i.e. Pod2 must use both NUMA nodes 
2. Memory Manager updates `cpuset.mems`. 
3. Kernel uses its default NUMA Memory Policy, i.e. "local" [1].
4. Memory is allocated "locally", i.e. from the NUMA node where CPUs are pinned. 
5. As normal, CPU Manager pinned CPUs to the first NUMA node.
6. Memory is consumed from the first NUMA node completely (10G). 
7. Then, container consumes memory from the second NUMA node (5G).

Please, correct me if it operates in a different way.

[1] https://www.systutorials.com/docs/linux/man/2-set_mempolicy/

A comment was added below the slides:

> \#\#\#\# Slide "Reject Pod2"
> 
> The slide _"Reject Pod2"_ results from a standard scenario, i.e.:
> 
> 0. Both NUMA nodes are empty.
> 1. Memory Manager finds out from which NUMA nodes a pod should allocate memory, i.e. *Pod2* must use both NUMA nodes. 
> 2. Memory Manager updates `cpuset.mems`. 
> 3. Kernel uses its default #(NUMA Memory Policy)(https://www.systutorials.com/docs/linux/man/2-set_mempolicy/), i.e. "local".
> 4. Memory is allocated "locally", i.e. from the NUMA node where CPUs are pinned. 
> 5. As normal, CPU Manager pinned CPUs to the first NUMA node.
> 6. Therefore, memory is consumed from the first NUMA node completely (10G). 
> 7. And then, *Pod2* consumes memory from the second NUMA node (5G).
> 
> This might be surprising that *Pod2* is rejected although there is still enough spare memory at the second NUMA node. Nevertheless, the behaviour is correct and complies with both designs, i.e., disjoint NUMA node groups design and Topology Manager design.  
> 
> The issue in the slide could also be illustrated in a different way, i.e., 5GB available to *Pod2* could be available from both nodes (e.g. 2GB from the first and 3GB from the second NUMA node). This would show that the memory needs to be allocated from a couple of different NUMA nodes, and that *Pod2* admission should be clearly rejected.  
>

### Hints Generation for Topology Manager

> In brief, the Memory Manager calculates topology hints for a container in Guaranteed QoS Pod for conventional memory and hugepages of all sizes. A topology hint is also known as _NUMA affinity_ which represents a possible set of NUMA nodes that has enough capacity to satisfy container's memory demand for all demanded memory types.

Reviewer 7: It looks like this was updated from last time, but I am still not comfortable with the wording of "A topology hint is also known as _NUMA affinity_ ". Right now this is true, but it will not necessarily be true forever as we expand and / or change the toplogy hint over time.

Reviewer: So probably we can just drop the mentioning of ` _NUMA affinity_` and leave it as:
```
In brief, the Memory Manager calculates topology hints for a container in Guaranteed QoS Pod for conventional memory and hugepages of all sizes. A topology hint represents a possible set of NUMA nodes that has enough capacity to satisfy the container's memory demand for all demanded memory types.
```

Reviewer 4: Done.

<!--
To generate a NUMA affinity for a container, Memory Manager refers to `Memory Map` and decides if _Free_ memory of _Allocatable Zone_ for all memory types from each NUMA node is enough to assign for the container. After collecting _NUMA affinity_ for each NUMA node from the perspective of memory, Memory Manager merges them to a topology hint and send it back to Topology Manager.

- Here is a brief example for two socket machine.
  - A Pod requests 2Gi of memory and 1 hugepages-1Gi.
  - Memory Manager found that NUMA node #0 has enough memory and hugepage but NUMA node #1 does not so that the calculated NUMA affinity is NUMA node #0.
  - Memory Manager returns the result as a topology hint with NUMA node #0.
-->

### New Flags and Configuration of the Memory Manager

#### Feature Gate Flag 

A new feature gate flag will be added to enable the Memory Manager feature. This feature gate will be disabled by default in the initial releases.

Syntax:
`--feature-gate=MemoryManager=false|true`

#### Memory Manager Policy Flag  

The `static` value of the flag enables the guaranteed memory allocation, whereas `none` disables it. 

Syntax:
`--memory-manager-policy=static|none`

> #### Reserved Memory Flag

Reviewer 7: This section is a little hard to follow with the way it is worded. I believe the main points are:
1) Node allocatable is already a feature of the kubelet
2) A set of flags exist to express the total amount of memory reserved for the system so that the "allocatable"  memory of the system can be calculated.
3) These flags are `kube-reserved`, `system-reserved`, and `eviction-threshold`.
3) The sum of the memory expressed by these flags declares the total *amount* of memory reserved for the system
4) Your new flag, `--reserved-memory`, then allows one to declare *how* this total reserved memory should be split across NUMA nodes.

Assuming what I've said is correct, I think a flow from top to bottom, introducing the flag this way will make it clearer as to its intended purpose.

Reviewer 2: Would it make more sense to align with how "reserved-cpus" works?  That is, you can only use the "--reserved-cpus" options if CPUs are not reserved via  kube-reserved or system-reserved.

That way you would only need to specify the reserved memory in one place rather than needing to ensure that two options agree with each other.

Also, do we want to consider making the memory eviction threshold NUMA-aware as well?  Is it possible for us to get into OOM trouble if one NUMA node is out of memory and the other isn't?

Reviewer: @cbf123

> That way you would only need to specify the reserved memory in one place rather than needing to ensure that two options agree with each other.

The problem that `kube-reserved` and `system-reserved`, not NUMA aware, so we can not rely on these options during the calculation of the Allocatable memory.

> Also, do we want to consider making the memory eviction threshold NUMA-aware as well? Is it possible for us to get into OOM trouble if one NUMA node is out of memory and the other isn't?

We pin the memory and calculate the free memory only for guaranteed containers, so it possible that the best-effort or burstable container will have OOM issue(because they have bigger OOM score), but I think the standard eviction-threshold mechanism should be enough in this case because we do not have memory pinning for such containers and it should have OOM issues only when the total amount of memory on the node is dropped under some boundary.

Reviewer 4: @klueska your flow was followed, which resulted in a rewording:

> [Node Allocatable Feature](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/reserve-compute-resources/) is already a feature of K8S, and it is commonly used by node administrators to reserve resources in a K8S node (for the kubelet processes or system processes) in order to enhance the stability of K8S nodes. A group of flags is used to specify the total amount of reserved memory at a K8S node. This value is then used to calculate the real offered amount of node's "allocatable" memory. Also, K8S scheduler uses "allocatable" to improve the scheduling. The foregoing flags are `kube-reserved`, `system-reserved` and `eviction-threshold`. Their sum accounts for the total amount of reserved memory.    
> 
> The new `--reserved-memory` was added to allow for this total reserved memory to be split (by a node administrator) across many NUMA nodes.

- [ ] Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

## Summary

The *Memory Manager* is a new component in *kubelet* ecosystem proposed to enable the feature of guaranteed memory (and hugepages) allocation for pods in Guaranteed QoS class. The feature offers a couple of allocation strategies. The first one, the *single-NUMA* strategy, is intended for high-performance and performance-sensitive applications. Relevant user stories are illustrated in here for the *single-NUMA* strategy. The second one, the *multi-NUMA* strategy, complements the overall design while it overcomes the situation that cannot be managed with the *single-NUMA* strategy. Namely, whenever the amount of memory demanded by a pod is in the excess of a single NUMA node capacity, the guaranteed memory is provisioned across multiple NUMA nodes with the *multi-NUMA* strategy.  

> In both scenarios, the *Memory Manager* employs hint generation protocol to yield the most suitable NUMA affinity for a pod, and it feeds the central manager (*Topology Manager*) with those affinity hints. Moreover, *Topology Manager* ensures that the memory, which a pod requests, is allocated from a minimum number of NUMA nodes.

Reviewer: `Moreover, *Topology Manager* ensures that the memory`, should it be `Moreover, *Memory Manager* ensures that the memory...`

Free + Reserved = Allocatable
```
or:
```go
Free = Allocatable - Reserved 
Reserved = Allocatable - Free
```

* The value of `TotalMemSize` is provided by `cadvisor` to *Memory Manager* for each memory type (regular memory, `hugepages-1Gi`, and so forth). The value of `TotalMemSize` is constant, and indicates the total (maximum) capacity of memory of a particular type available at a NUMA node. 
* `SystemReserved` is equal to `0` (zero) unless the administrator of _K8S_ node decides to employ [Node Allocatable Feature](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/reserve-compute-resources/) which was designed for improving the stability of _K8S_ node. We elaborate below the characteristics of this feature. Also, we describe the way how *Memory Manager* must be configured to satisfy and remain backwards-compatible with [Node Allocatable Feature](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/reserve-compute-resources/). The value of `SystemReserved` depends on the pre-configuration passed to *Memory Manager* by the administrator of _K8S_ node through `--reserved-memory` flag. Details concerning the flag are present in [this](#reserved-memory-flag) section.

> * `Reserved` memory denotes exactly the same what we already meant by another term, i.e. **guaranteed** memory. So, in other words, `SystemReserved` stands for the memory **guaranteed** for system or `kubelet` daemons.

Reviewer: I think we should re-phrase the `Reserved` section because it hard to understand that it contains the memory that already in use by running containers.
I think you should move the `Reserved` section that appears below to here - https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1203/files#diff-9b2b9d1d51c55bd057576a556900a693R262

Reviewer 4: Thanks, Done. 
Rephrased to 
```
Reserved` indicates the total **guaranteed** memory reserved for containers in Guaranteed QoS class
```

## Summary

The *Memory Manager* is a new component in *kubelet* ecosystem proposed to enable the feature of guaranteed memory (and hugepages) allocation for pods in Guaranteed QoS class. The feature offers a couple of allocation strategies. The first one, the *single-NUMA* strategy, is intended for high-performance and performance-sensitive applications. Relevant user stories are illustrated in here for the *single-NUMA* strategy. The second one, the *multi-NUMA* strategy, complements the overall design while it overcomes the situation that cannot be managed with the *single-NUMA* strategy. Namely, whenever the amount of memory demanded by a pod is in the excess of a single NUMA node capacity, the guaranteed memory is provisioned across multiple NUMA nodes with the *multi-NUMA* strategy.  

In both scenarios, the *Memory Manager* employs hint generation protocol to yield the most suitable NUMA affinity for a pod, and it feeds the central manager (*Topology Manager*) with those affinity hints. Moreover, *Topology Manager* ensures that the memory, which a pod requests, is allocated from a minimum number of NUMA nodes.

> The up-to-date implementation of the *Memory Manager* is available through the link in [Implementation History](##implementation-history) section. Technically, the *single-NUMA* strategy is a special case of the *multi-NUMA* strategy, and thus, no separate implementation was developed for them. Still, the proposal differentiates between the *single-NUMA* and the *multi-NUMA* strategies. First of all, it allows for a number of important use cases to be discussed and contrasted. Also, the *multi-NUMA* strategy is subjected to the additional configuration options that affect the way it performs.          

Reviewer 5: > Technically, the *single-NUMA* strategy is a special case of the *multi-NUMA* strategy

Exactly for this reason I'd propose not to separate single-NUMA and multi-NUMA strategies across the document. This would make it more generic and understandable in my opinion.

Reviewer 4: As above, I think it is still viable to keep the distinction between  single-NUMA and multi-NUMA cases.

```
<<[UNRESOLVED]>>

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above.
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

TBD

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal and how do we mitigate.  Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed and by whom?

Consider including folks that also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

TBD

<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

## Design Details 

### How to enable the guaranteed memory allocation over many NUMA nodes?

Our initial concept concerning the guaranteed memory allocation had a limitation, and for each container, the container's memory consumption was limited to exactly one source, i.e., a single NUMA node. That is why Memory Menager was planned to feature only the single-numa-node policy, but it was in the past, and it is not true anymore.  

> 

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure we need to mention previous ideas in this document. It makes understanding harder in my opinion.

Reviewer 4: Generally, I think, it's good practice to provide background information even if it is lengthy. It helps to understand the motivation which led to the present proposal.
Nevertheless, I followed your suggestion, and I commented out the introductory passages.

  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Memory Map](#memory-map)
    - [Memory Maps at start-up (with examples)](#memory-maps-at-start-up-with-examples)
    - [Memory Maps at runtime (with examples)](#memory-maps-at-runtime-with-examples)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

## Summary

> *Memory Manager* is a new component in *kubelet* ecosystem proposed to enable both *single-NUMA* and *multi-NUMA* guaranteed memory (and hugepages) allocation for pods in Guaranteed QoS class. *Single-NUMA* feature is designed for high-performance and performance-sensitive applications. Relevant user stories are illustrated in here. *Multi-NUMA* feature complements the design while it overcomes the case unmanageble by *single-NUMA* feature. Namely, whenever the amount of demanded memory exceeds the capacity of a single NUMA node, the guaranteed memory must be provisioned across multiple NUMA nodes. *Memory Manager* employs hint generation protocol to yield the most suitable NUMA affinity for a pod, and it feeds the central manager (*Topology Manager*) with the affinity hints. Link to up-to-date implementation of *Memory Manager* is present in [Implementation History](##implementation-history) section.    

Reviewer: You are right, it no separate design for single and multi NUMA cases, I believe it should be renamed to something that will be similar to the CPU manager static policy name.

> *Memory Manager* is a new component in *kubelet* ecosystem proposed to enable both *single-NUMA* and *multi-NUMA* guaranteed memory (and hugepages) allocation for pods in Guaranteed QoS class. *Single-NUMA* feature is designed for high-performance and performance-sensitive applications. Relevant user stories are illustrated in here. *Multi-NUMA* feature complements the design while it overcomes the case unmanageble by *single-NUMA* feature. Namely, whenever the amount of demanded memory exceeds the capacity of a single NUMA node, the guaranteed memory must be provisioned across multiple NUMA nodes. *Memory Manager* employs hint generation protocol to yield the most suitable NUMA affinity for a pod, and it feeds the central manager (*Topology Manager*) with the affinity hints. Link to up-to-date implementation of *Memory Manager* is present in [Implementation History](##implementation-history) section.    

Reviewer 4: Many thanks Kevin, we are more than happy that the official review kicked off.

Let me present the background information and the motivation.

MM - Memory Manager

The initial design and implementation of MM was intentionally confined to `single-NUMA` feature with the assumption that `multi-NUMA` feature will be added to MM once the Linux kernel implements the feature.

However, the community urged us to implement `multi-NUMA` as something really needed. That is why the split into `single-NUMA` and `multi-NUMA` features emerged for the first time as the development of those features occurred sequntially.

Another reason behind the split was caused by our decision to limit MM Alpha release to the `single-NUMA` feature and exclude `multi-NUMA` feature. We thouhgt that by doing that, we could shorten the review process and obtain the approval before the deadline of v1.19 Enhancement freeze.

Nonetheless, the deadline has passed, and there is more time to consider `multi-NUMA` for Alpha release of MM. In fact, we opt for `multi-NUMA` to be included in Alpha release of MM. 
*What do you think?*
We should also discuss the default option for `--numa-groups`. 

As you and me (in sig-node presentation) indicated, `multi-NUMA` feature already includes `single-NUMA` feature. So, in fact, a single feature exists but many strategies. Therefore, as you advised, I will use term "strategy" for `single-NUMA` or `multi-NUMA`. 

Overall, I will change the narration of the proposal to relfect the actual situation.  
I also took into account your other hints.

I rephrased to:

> The *Memory Manager* is a new component in *kubelet* ecosystem proposed to enable the feature of guaranteed memory (and hugepages) allocation for pods in Guaranteed QoS class. The feature offers a couple of allocation strategies. The first one, the *single-NUMA* strategy, is intended for high-performance and performance-sensitive applications. Relevant user stories are illustrated in here for the *single-NUMA* strategy. The second one, the *multi-NUMA* strategy, complements the overall design while it overcomes the situation that cannot be managed with the *single-NUMA* strategy. Namely, whenever the amount of memory demanded by a pod is in the excess of a single NUMA node capacity, the guaranteed memory is provisioned across multiple NUMA nodes with the *multi-NUMA* strategy.  

> In both scenarios, the *Memory Manager* employs hint generation protocol to yield the most suitable NUMA affinity for a pod, and it feeds the central manager (*Topology Manager*) with those affinity hints. Moreover, *Topology Manager* ensures that the memory, which a pod requests, is allocated from a minimum number of NUMA nodes.

> The up-to-date implementation of the *Memory Manager* is available through the link in [Implementation History](##implementation-history) section. Technically, the *single-NUMA* strategy is a special case of the *multi-NUMA* strategy, and thus, no separate implementation was developed for them. Still, the proposal differentiates between the *single-NUMA* and the *multi-NUMA* strategies. First of all, it allows for a number of important use cases to be discussed and contrasted. Also, the *multi-NUMA* strategy is subjected to the additional configuration options that affect the way it performs.

-->

<!--
Detailedly, to get an information that a resource that container requests is available or not, Topology Manager talks to other managers like CPU Manager and Device Manager, called _hint providers_, which can give the needed information of CPU cores and PCIe peripherals like NIC and GPU, respectively, in each NUMA node. Once collecting all the hints in each NUMA node from the managers, then Topology Manager finally determines which NUMA node's resources in a host can be allocatable for the requested container.

However, the problem raising by this KEP is that there is no hint provider which can give a hint for memory and hugepages resources. That is, Topology Manager could not determine NUMA-aware resource allocation in best way due to absence of memory-related information, which causes inter-node communication overhead among CPU, memory, and PCIe devices and leads overall performance degradation of containers.

To resolve the problem, Memory Manager is proposed in this KEP to provide a way to guarantee NUMA affinity of memory as well as other resources (i.e., CPU and PCIe peripherals) in a procedure of container deployment.
-->

## Motivation

### Goals

> - Offer guaranteed memory (and hugepages) allocation across individual NUMA nodes (*single-NUMA* feature) or multiple NUMA nodes (*multi-NUMA* feature) for containers (within a pod) in Guaranteed QoS class. The concept of guaranteed memory allocation is coherently demonstrated in [sig-node Memory Manager presentation][sig-node-memory-manager-presentation] and also in the proposal. The presentation exemplifies the way *Memory Manager* generates *multi-NUMA* (and *singe-NUMA*) affinity hints (to feed *Topology Manager*), which is also elaborated in section [Multi-NUMA and single-NUMA Affinity - Hints Generation for Topology Manager](#multi-numa-and-single-numa-affinity---hints-generation-for-topology-manager). 

Reviewer 4: Done.

<!-- Notice that *multi-NUMA* feature already incorporates *single-NUMA* feature which is a special case of *multi-NUMA* affinity. Therefore by referring to *multi-NUMA* feature, we refer to both features.
-->
<!-- if we refer to the implementation of *Memory Manager* ([Implementation History](##implementation-history) section) -->

<!--
- To provide topology hint of memory and hugepage resources to the Topology Manager, which will allow Topology Manager to allocate memory, hugepages, CPUs, and PCI devices on the same NUMA node.
-->

### Non-Goals

> - Guaranteeing the affinity of memory and hugepages to the same NUMA node for the whole group of containers (within a pod) is out of scope.

Reviewer: I think it will not be a problem to implement it, we will pass over all container requests under the pod and calculate possible hints.

> - Guaranteeing the affinity of memory and hugepages to the same NUMA node for the whole group of containers (within a pod) is out of scope.

Reviewer 4: I decided to move it to the goals, as follows:
> - Guaranteeing the affinity of memory and hugepages to the same NUMA node for the whole group of containers (within a pod). This is a long-term goal which will be achieved along with PR [#1752](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1752) and the implementation of `hintprovider.GetPodLevelTopologyHints()` API in the *Memory Manager*.

- Both the upgrade of K8S scheduler and further extension of the official pod specification are out of scope.

- This proposal confines to the family of Linux operating systems.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 4: I created a separate subsection ("Design Overview") in the Proposal section.
I would prefer to keep the template structure, thus keeping the Proposal section.

- The hints are intended to indicate preferred memory (and hugepages) affinity which pins the memory for a container either to a single or a group of NUMA nodes.
- By design, *Memory Manager* offers guaranteed memory allocation for pods in Guaranteed QoS class.

![alt text](./mm_tm_diagram.png)

Once *kubelet* requests a guaranteed QoS pod admission, as shown in the figure above, *Topology Manager* queries *Memory Manager* about the preferred NUMA affinity for memory and hugepages, for all containers in a pod. For each container in a pod, *Memory Manager* calculates the affinity using its internal database, namely the `Node Map`. The `Node Map` is an object which is responsible for tracking the utilization of memory (and hugepages) for all containers in Guaranteed QoS class. 
Once *Memory Manager* completes the computations, it returns the hints to *Topology Manager* so that *Topology Manager* can figure out which NUMA node or a group of NUMA nodes are the best fit for memory pinning, for a container. The overall calculation is performed for all containers in the pod, and if none of containers is rejected, the pod becomes finally admitted and deployed.

> In the deployment phase, *Memory Manager* updates its `Node Map` to reflect the amount of memory and hugepages requested by a container. After that, *Memory Manager* enforces the consumption of memory and hugepages for the container. The enforcement limits the container's memory consumption to the NUMA node or the group of NUMA nodes indicated by *Topology Manager*. In the final step in figure above, *Memory Manager* updates `cgroups`, namely `cpuset.mems` (more details in section [CPUSET enforcement](#cpuset-enforcement)). 

Author: I think it's a matter of expression, the memory manager PoC code exactly does that(reflecting requested memory on Allocate()) like cpu manager.
The reason why this phrase started with `In the deployment` is most people don't know the sequence of topology manager(iteration of GetTopologyHints&Allocate&canAdmitPod) precisely.

> In the deployment phase, *Memory Manager* updates its `Node Map` to reflect the amount of memory and hugepages requested by a container. After that, *Memory Manager* enforces the consumption of memory and hugepages for the container. The enforcement limits the container's memory consumption to the NUMA node or the group of NUMA nodes indicated by *Topology Manager*. In the final step in figure above, *Memory Manager* updates `cgroups`, namely `cpuset.mems` (more details in section [CPUSET enforcement](#cpuset-enforcement)). 

Reviewer 7: I am basing it off of the graphic you have right above this that shows the `Allocate()` function and how it factors into the flow.

> In the deployment phase, *Memory Manager* updates its `Node Map` to reflect the amount of memory and hugepages requested by a container. After that, *Memory Manager* enforces the consumption of memory and hugepages for the container. The enforcement limits the container's memory consumption to the NUMA node or the group of NUMA nodes indicated by *Topology Manager*. In the final step in figure above, *Memory Manager* updates `cgroups`, namely `cpuset.mems` (more details in section [CPUSET enforcement](#cpuset-enforcement)). 

Reviewer 4: That's probably because "deployment" here stands for the whole process including the admission phase.

But, I updated to make it more precise:
> In the admission phase, the *Memory Manager* uses `Allocate()` and updates its `Node Map` to reflect the amount of memory and hugepages requested by a container. After that, *Memory Manager* uses `AddContainer()` and enforces the consumption of memory and hugepages for the container.

In MM `AddContainer()` contains:
```go
	// Get NUMA node affinity of blocks assigned to the container during Allocate()
	var nodes []string
	for _, block := range m.state.GetMemoryBlocks(string(pod.UID), container.Name) {
		for _, nodeID := range block.NUMAAffinity {
			nodes = append(nodes, strconv.Itoa(nodeID))
		}
	}
```

> Nonetheless, the management of memory is sustained by means of various mechanisms independent of *Memory Manager*. In the situation when memory limits are exceeded (e.g. by containers), a K8S node can trigger one of the mechanisms described in [this](#kubernetes-nodes-memory-management-mechanisms-and-their-relation-to-the-memory-manager) section. The section discusses how those mechanisms relate to *Memory Manager*. At the moment, let us focus on the machansim relevant for the admission of pods in Guaranteed QoS class. The mechanism involves Out-of-Memory (OOM) kernel killer. Operating system triggers OOM killer and kills processes with the accordance to OOM score ranking (more details in section [OOM score enforcement](#oom-score-enforcement)). Low-priority containers (BestEffort/QoS or Burstable/QoS) are targeted before the high-priority containers (Guaranteed/QoS). Therefore, *Memory Manager* will offer guaranteed memory allocation (only) for pods in Guaranteed QoS class. 

Reviewer 4: Done.
Added: 
> The *Memory Manager* will offer guaranteed memory allocation (only) for pods in Guaranteed QoS class, which is clarified in [this](#mechanism-ii-out-of-memory-oom-killer-by-kernelos) section.

<!-- Note that containers of Guaranteed Pod of which Memory Manager takes care are guaranteed to consume allocated memory and hugepages on the designated NUMA node while other Pods are deployed later, by utilizing [OOM score enforcement](#oom-score-enforcement) system of Kubelet. -->

![alt text](./multi_numa.png "Multi-NUMA Partitioning")

> *Multi-NUMA* feature is enabled by treating a group of NUMA nodes as a unit, as illustrated in the figure above. The groups can be statically configured with a new _kubelet_ `--multi-numa-groups` flag (more details in section [Multi-NUMA Groups Flag](#multi-numa-groups-flag)). The groups must be disjoint, however, as shown in the figure above. For instance, `[0]`, `[1, 2]`, `[3]` groups are disjoint. This is because the groups that overlap do not ensure guaranteed memory allocation across multiple NUMA nodes (e.g. `[0, 1]`, `[1, 2]`, `[3]`). In other words, if a pair of groups overlap, memory resources of some group can be prior consumed by another group so that the other group will starve.

Reviewer 4: Done:
> Figure above illustrates three groups of NUMA nodes. The groups can be statically configured with a new _kubelet_ `--numa-groups` flag (more details in section [Multi-NUMA Groups Flag](#multi-numa-groups-flag)). *Multi-NUMA* strategy treats a group of NUMA nodes as a unit, and it will combine the memory from the group.

The details were moved to the "(#multi-numa-groups-flag)" section.

#### Story 2 : Databases

- Databases (e.g., Oracle, PostgreSQL, and MySQL) require relatively extensive amount of memory and hugepages to access massive volumes of data relatively efficiently. In order to reduce the latency caused by cross-NUMA memory access and sharing, all resources (CPU cores, memory, hugepages, and I/O devices) should be aligned to the same single NUMA node. This will serve the stability and performance enhancement significantly.
```
<<[UNRESOLVED]>>

> 

Reviewer 4: From K8S enhancement template:

> <<[UNRESOLVED optional short context or usernames ]>>
> Stuff that is being argued.
> <<[/UNRESOLVED]>>

I used `[UNRESOLVED]` as a comment tag. For example, I commented out the section `### Kubernetes Node's Memory Management Mechanisms and their relation to the Memory Manager`.

So as we progress with the review, we can either decide to delete what is actually  `[UNRESOLVED]`, or we can refine it.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above.
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

TBD

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal and how do we mitigate.  Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed and by whom?

Consider including folks that also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

TBD

<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

## Design Details 

### The Concept of Node Map and Memory Maps

> *Memory Manager* has an internal database, i.e. `Node Map` that incorporates `Memory Maps`. This database is used to keep track of the memory reserved for already deployed containers in Guaranteed QoS class. `Node Map` concept was endorsed to support multi-NUMA feature because prior to that, single-NUMA feature depended solely on `Memory Maps`. For that foregoing purpose, `Node Map` object remembers the static configuration of disjont NUMA-node groups (pre-configured via `--multi-numa-groups` *kubelet* flag) in `Node` objects. Notice that in fact `Memory Map` offers the counters for tracking the memory; therefore, the map should not be understood as a map that allows for reservation of ranges of memory or consecutive blocks of memory. 

Reviewer 4: I removed the statement:
> " Node Map concept was endorsed to support multi-NUMA feature because prior to that, single-NUMA feature depended solely on Memory Maps"

because I added this one:
> Technically, the *single-NUMA* strategy is a special case of the *multi-NUMA* strategy, and thus, no separate implementation was developed for them. Still, the proposal differentiates between the *single-NUMA* and the *multi-NUMA* strategies. First of all, it allows for a number of important use cases to be discussed and contrasted. Also, the *multi-NUMA* strategy is subjected to the additional configuration options that affect the way it performs.          

I will keep:
> `Node Map` object remembers the static configuration of disjont NUMA-node groups (pre-configured via `--numa-groups` *kubelet* flag) in `Node` objects.

until we describe "dynamic" NUMA node grouping in this new section:

> <<[UNRESOLVED]>>
> 
> \#\#\# Static versus dynamic grouping of NUMA nodes, and why `--numa-groups` flag was proposed
> 
> In the section above, we explained why NUMA groups must be disjoint.
> The disjont set of NUMA groups can be configured either:
> * statically - it is why we introduced `--numa-groups` kubelet flag
> * dynamically - TBD... 
> 
> TBD: a dynamic approach is something that may lead to the eliminate of `--numa-groups` flag, and thus, the discussion about setting the default value for `--numa-groups` might be also not necessary anymore...
> 
> TBD: present cons & pros for both static and dynamic NUMA nodes grouping/assignment/allocation/etc.
> 
> <<[/UNRESOLVED]>>

@cynepco3hahue Could we discuss the "dynamic" approach on Slack?

I added the section above, and this another section:
> \#\#\# How to enable the guaranteed memory allocation over many NUMA nodes?

as you advised, in order to explain why:
1) the NUMA node groups must be disjoint (so that the guaranteed memory allocation can be ensured)
2) `--numa-groups` flag is needed

Essentially, the following question arose: *What if a pod requires more memory than, in fact, a single NUMA node can provide?* This gave the motivation that underpins the need for multi-NUMA guaranteed memory allocation (pinning).
-->

The Linux kernel does not support multi-NUMA memory allocation (pinning), to the best of our knowledge, and thus, we assumed that we have to wait for a suitable upgrade in the Linux kernel so as to adopt multi-NUMA memory allocation (pinning) strategy in the *Memory Manager*. However, the community urged us to implement multi-NUMA strategy as something that is really necessary. In fact, we come up with a simple concept and design for multi-NUMA memory allocation (pinning), which allows for guaranteed memory allocation over many NUMA nodes. The main idea is to treat a group of NUMA nodes as an independent unit, and manage those independent units right by the *Memory Manager*.

> The groups of NUMA nodes must be disjoint. This is the rule. A disjont set of NUMA groups is exemplified in the figure in [this](#design-overview) section. The groups in the figure are disjiont, i.e.: `[0]`, `[1, 2]` and `[3]`. The rule must be obeyed because the groups that overlap basically do not ensure guaranteed memory allocation over multiple NUMA nodes. 

Reviewer 4: Done.

<!-- _Free_ section of _Allocatable Zone_ indicates a free memory for new containers in a Guaranteed QoS Pod. When a new container is deployed, _Free_ memory is subtracted by the requested memory size of the container. And when a running container is terminated, the requested memory size of the container is returned to _Free_ memory.
-->

### Simulation - how the Memory Manager works? (by examples)

In this section, a number of slides is intended to illustrate the operation of the Memory Manager in various situations, i.e., to show how the pods in different QoS classes (Guaranteed, BestEffort/Burstable) are handled by the Memory Manager or other means, and how the disjoint groups of NUMA nodes are dynamically managed (created or removed) by the Memory Manager.  

![alt text](./mm_simulation.jpg)

```
<<[UNRESOLVED]>>

### Multi-NUMA and single-NUMA Affinity - Hints Generation for Topology Manager

> The concept of multi-NUMA guaranteed memory allocation was clearly explained [here][sig-node-memory-manager-presentation]. The presentation also contains examples on how multi-NUMA hint generation is performed by Memory Manager.

Reviewer 4: Done.

- Here is a brief example for two socket machine.
  - A Pod requests 2Gi of memory and 1 hugepages-1Gi.
  - Memory Manager found that NUMA node #0 has enough memory and hugepage but NUMA node #1 does not so that the calculated NUMA affinity is NUMA node #0.
  - Memory Manager returns the result as a topology hint with NUMA node #0.

### The configuration of Memory Manager

The Node Allocatable memory of Node Allocatable Feature is calculated by following formula:
- [Node-Allocatable] = [Node-Capacity] - [Kube-Reserved] - [System-Reserved] - [Eviction-Threshold]

The Node Allocatable is exposed to API server as part of `v1.Node` object and referred by scheduler to select appropriate worker node to bind a Pod.

Configuring Memory Manager is important, Memory Manager assumes that components in kube/system-reserved consume memory from Pre Reserved Zone so that total amount of Pre Reserved Zone for every NUMA node and memory type should be identical to sum of `Kube-Reserved`, `System-Reserved` and `Eviction-Threshold`.

This constraint is proposed to avoid misconfiguration of Memory Manager that may lead node to Pod binding issue.

> TBD: example of binding issue

Reviewer 4: @bg-chun Could you elaborate on that?

> TBD: example of binding issue

Author: It means the `pod binding issue` that can happen when a pod object is bound to a node(by scheduler) which has mis-configured configuration for memory manager.

> TBD: example of binding issue

Reviewer 4: @bg-chun 
1. Do you mean K8S scheduler or some other scheduler in a node?
2. Could you give an example of such a misconfiguration? What is the proper configuration? (example?)

> TBD: example of binding issue

Author: @cezaryzukowski
>1. Do you mean K8S scheduler or some other scheduler in a node?

- It meant K8S scheduler which binds `v1.pod` object to `v1.node` object.

>2. Could you give an example of such a misconfiguration? What is the proper configuration? (example?)

- What I thought was:
  - example of such a misconfiguration 
     - a machine has 40GBi 
     - a node configured to use 32Gib for for pod(It means `kube-reserved` is configured with 32Gib).
     - but Memory Manager reserved only 20 Gib by `Kubelet Flag: --reserved-memory=`. 
     - Gap between `kube-reserved` and `--reserved-memory` is 12 Gib.
     - The above gap may lead us to the issue that Memory Manager will reject a pod even though there is 12 Gib free memory.
  - proper configuration?:
     - Sum of the reserved memory of Memory Manager(by using `--reserved-memory`) should be equal to amount of memory of `kube-reserved`.

To minimize Pod binding issue, total amount of Allocatable Zone memory should be identical to Node Allocatable memory for each memory type. Memory Manager validates it's configuration flags to ensure equality between total amount of Allocatable Zone memory and Node Allocatable memory for each memory type.

> Nevertheless, this indenticality doesn't always guarantee success of Pod binding with single NUMA memory affinity. In some cases, a node may satisfy memory request of a Pod across NUMA nodes, but particular NUMA nodes may not have adequate memory for given container in a Pod. In these cases, Memory Manager will not provide any topology hint to the Topology Manager.

Reviewer 4: Done. I removed it. I think, this text is obsolete and refers back to the point when only the single-NUMA strategy was considered in MM implementation. So, it's why it caused discrepancy.

Following feature gate and flag is used to config Memory Manager:
- Feature Gate: --feature-gate=MemoryManager=true

> - Kubelet Flag: --pre-reserved-zone=[{numa-node=int, memory-type=string, limit=string}][,][...]

Reviewer 4: Done.

type ContainerMemoryAssignments map[string]map[string][]Block

// Reader interface used to read current memory/pod assignment state
type Reader interface {
	// GetMachineState returns Memory Map stored in the State
	GetMachineState() NodeMap
	// GetMemoryBlocks returns memory assignments of a container
	GetMemoryBlocks(podUID string, containerName string) []Block
	// GetMemoryAssignments returns ContainerMemoryAssignments
	GetMemoryAssignments() ContainerMemoryAssignments
}

type writer interface {
	// SetMachineState stores NodeMap in State
	SetMachineState(memoryMap NodeMap)
	// SetMemoryBlocks stores memory assignments of a container
	SetMemoryBlocks(podUID string, containerName string, blocks []Block)
	// SetMemoryAssignments sets ContainerMemoryAssignments by using the passed parameter
	SetMemoryAssignments(assignments ContainerMemoryAssignments)
	// Delete deletes corresponding Blocks from ContainerMemoryAssignments
	Delete(podUID string, containerName string)
	// ClearState clears machineState and ContainerMemoryAssignments
	ClearState()
}

// State interface provides methods for tracking and setting memory/pod assignment
type State interface {
	Reader
	writer

> }

Reviewer 4: Done. I removed it. In fact, it was added to illustrate the interfaces involved before the implementation was done, but as you indicated browsing the code might be more valuable then traversing the KEP. Therefore, we instead refer to the implementation.

### Changes of existing components

#### Container Manager changes

Container Manager will create Memory Manager and register to Topology Manager as hint provider.

#### Topology Manager changes

Topology Manager will call out Memory Manager to gather topology hint and allocate memory resources during its admit sequence.

#### Internal Container Lifecycle changes

InternalContainerLifecycle will call out Memory Manager on container lifecycle events(Add/Stop) to allocate and reclaim memory resources.

### Feature Gate and Kubelet Flags

A new feature gate will be added to enable the Memory Manager feature. This feature gate will be disabled by default in the early releases.

#### Feature Gate  
`--feature-gate=MemoryManager=true`

#### Memory Manager Policy Flag  
`--memory-manager-policy` - to configure Memory Manager behaviour, `static` enables multi-NUMA (and single-NUMA) feature, whereas `none` disables it 

Example:

> `--memory-manager-policy=none` or `--memory-manager-policy=static`

Reviewer: I think we wanted to make it similar to the CPU manager, like static means that the container pinned to some NUMA nodes, but I do not have a strong opinion regarding the name, naming is always a problematic subject :)

> `--memory-manager-policy=none` or `--memory-manager-policy=static`

Reviewer 4: That's right, we followed the CPU Manager convention [1].
In terms of CPU affinity and pinning, words `statically` and `static` appears in the following context:

> As Guaranteed pods whose containers fit the requirements for being statically assigned are scheduled to the node, CPUs are removed from the shared pool and placed in the cpuset for the container. CFS quota is not used to bound the CPU usage of these containers as their usage is bound by the scheduling domain itself. In others words, the number of CPUs in the container cpuset is equal to the integer CPU limit specified in the pod spec. This static assignment increases CPU affinity and decreases context switches due to throttling for the CPU-bound workload.

In terms of memory, it can be seen in a similar way. Once memory is pinned to particular NUMA nodes, it does not change, i.e. it is `static`.

Besides, CPUs can be affined to multiple NUMA nodes by CPU Manager? So, the policy name `static` in CPU Manager could also be named `multi-numa`.

If the name of policy should be changed in MM from `static` to some other name, let us know.

[1] https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/cpu-management-policies/

#### Pre-Reserved Memory Zone Flag

This will be also followed by a Kubelet Flag for the Memory Manager configuration, which is described above in [The configuration of Memory Manager](#the-configuration-of-memory-manager) section.

`--pre-reserved-memory-zone=[{numa-node=int, memory-type=string, limit=string}][,][...]`

Example:

>    `--pre-reserved-memory-zone= {numa-node=0, memory-type=memory, limit=1Gi}, {numa-node=1, memory-type=memory, limit=1Gi}`

Reviewer: 1-4 good point!
5. memory and hugepages2M and hugepages1G
6. it should have the same restrictions as the request and limit under the container resources

>    `--pre-reserved-memory-zone= {numa-node=0, memory-type=memory, limit=1Gi}, {numa-node=1, memory-type=memory, limit=1Gi}`

Reviewer 4: Many thanks for enhancing the UX.
Done. So, it was changed to:
`pre-reserved-memory-zone` => `reserved-memory`
`memory-type` => `type`

#### Multi-NUMA Groups Flag
`--multi-numa-groups` - to configure disjoint groups of NUMA nodes, used for preferred multi-NUMA node memory allocation

Example:
`--multi-numa-groups=[[0, 4], [1, 5]]`

<!--
By design, *Multi-NUMA* strategy must treat a group (a group of NUMA nodes) as a unit. *Multi-NUMA* strategy will allocate the memory from more than one NUMA node if needed. 
-->

> The groups must be disjoint, however, as shown in the figure in [this](#design-overview) section. For instance, `[0]`, `[1, 2]`, `[3]` groups are disjoint. This is because the groups that overlap do not ensure guaranteed memory allocation across multiple NUMA nodes (e.g. `[0, 1]`, `[1, 2]`, `[3]`). In other words, if a pair of groups overlap, memory resources of some group can be prior consumed by another group so that the other group will starve.

Reviewer 4: It should remain because this concept (disjoint groups of NUMA nodes) and `--multi-numa` are independent concepts.
Disjoint groups of NUMA nodes is something that must exist to offer guaranteed memory allocation, and  `--multi-numa` flag was something additional developed on top of that.

At the beginning of the test, the code will determine if the system under test has support for single or multi-NUMA nodes.

Both Single-NUMA and Multi-NUMA tests will:
- be carried out for each of the four Topology Manager policies
- be spinning up non-guaranteed (BestEffort, Burstable) pods, guaranteed pods, and multiple guaranteed and non-guaranteed pods
- be carried out for all policies and all QoS classes, tests will validate whether pods can be deployed without errors

#### Single-NUMA Systems Tests
The admission of pods will be validated. Tests related to multi-NUMA systems will be skipped. 

#### Multi-NUMA System Tests
Memory pinning will be validated for Topology Manager `single-numa-node` and `restricted` policies. Once a pod in Guaranteed/QoS class is deployed, the NUMA node affinity for CPU assignment, memory, hugepages, or devices will be validated. Specifically for Topology Manager `restricted` policy, multi-NUMA feature will be tested against memory demands exceeding the capacity of a single NUMA node. 

### Graduation Criteria

#### Phase 1: Alpha (v1.19)
- Feature gate is disabled by default.

> - Memory Manager supports multi-NUMA guaranteed memory allocation (incorporates single-numa allocation) for pods in Guaranteed/QoS class.

Reviewer 4: Done. You are right.

- Unit test coverage.
- Memory Manager allocation policy takes topology hints into account.
- Alpha-level documentation.

> - All flags are supported, i.e.: `--memory-manager-policy`, `--pre-reserved-memory-zone`, `--multi-numa-groups`.

Reviewer: nope it should not be supported, because we do not have an agreement on what to do with default value, so we decided not to add it for now and leave it for beta once we will have a proper solution

> - All flags are supported, i.e.: `--memory-manager-policy`, `--pre-reserved-memory-zone`, `--multi-numa-groups`.

Reviewer 4: Done. I removed it from the KEP because, in fact, the conclusion was towards removing the flag.
I mean, the conclusion above: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1203#issuecomment-661792150 (it contains the reasoning why the flag should be removed based on the opinions from different people)
The flag should be removed in favor of NUMA distances feature (a further incremental change).
@cynepco3hahue as far as I remember we agreed on Slack towards removing the flag :)

#### Phase 2: Beta (v1.20)
- Add E2E tests.
- Feature gate is enabled by default.

> - Provide beta-level documentation.

Reviewer 4: Done. That is:
* `Phase 1: Alpha (target v1.20)`
* `Phase 2: Beta (target v1.21)`

  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Memory Map](#memory-map)
    - [Memory Maps at start-up (with examples)](#memory-maps-at-start-up-with-examples)
    - [Memory Maps at runtime (with examples)](#memory-maps-at-runtime-with-examples)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

## Summary

> The *Memory Manager* is a new component in *kubelet* ecosystem proposed to enable the feature of guaranteed memory (and hugepages) allocation for pods in Guaranteed QoS class. The feature offers a couple of allocation strategies. The first one, the *single-NUMA* strategy, is intended for high-performance and performance-sensitive applications. Relevant user stories are illustrated in here for the *single-NUMA* strategy. The second one, the *multi-NUMA* strategy, complements the overall design while it overcomes the situation that cannot be managed with the *single-NUMA* strategy. Namely, whenever the amount of memory demanded by a pod is in the excess exceeds of a single NUMA node capacity, the guaranteed memory is provisioned across multiple NUMA nodes with the *multi-NUMA* strategy.  

Reviewer 5: Do we really need new component? Would it make sense to combine memory and CPU allocations in one component? Either by extending CPU manager or by creating Native Resource manager that would handle both CPU and Memory allocations?

Reviewer: 1. I agree it tightly coupled, but it still different components under the operating system, and in theory it possible that you want to use only the CPU manager or memory manager, but not both.
2. I think it easier to develop the stuff when you have functionality separated between managers, so you do not really need to be afraid that you will break the backward compatibility of the CPU manager.
3. The memory manager will be an alpha feature, so it will need to introduce additional conditional checks under the CPU manager, which also will not make the code more readable.
4. It has a different structure under the state file and it has a different logic hints generation, compose CPU manager and memory can again make code more complex.
5. We do not need the reconcile loop under the memory manager.
6. We have different types of memory, so I think it just natural to work with all of them under the single manager.

I like the idea of Native Resource manager, but in this case, it should be done as step two and only in the case when you really want to introduce more complex hint calculations that will see CPU and memory as a single unit(all different permutations of NUMA nodes and CPU's).

Reviewer 5: > in theory it possible that you want to use only the CPU manager or memory manager, but not both.

Do you have any real life examples of this? Even if they exists that can be an option for the combined memory and CPU manager.

>  think it easier to develop the stuff when you have functionality separated between managers, so you do not really need to be afraid that you will break the backward compatibility of the CPU manager.

> The memory manager will be an alpha feature, so it will need to introduce additional conditional checks under the CPU manager, which also will not make the code more readable.

Native Resource manager would eliminate both these concerns I believe.

> compose CPU manager and memory can again make code more complex.

Agree. However, it makes sense to discuss this further, find out proc and cons of each approach and select the best of two in my opinion.

> We have different types of memory, so I think it just natural to work with all of them under the single manager.

HugePages and Memory are quite different resources from usage point of view. Following your logic why not to separate them too?

Reviewer: > Do you have any real life examples of this? Even if they exists that can be an option for the combined memory and CPU manager.

The only case that I can imagine, that if the kernel will have some better heuristics for the CPU or memory allocation in the future, a user will want to leave the managing of one of the resources to the kernel without setting the pinning(I know that it possible to use NUMA auto-balancing feature, I also know that this feature disabled under RT workflows).
I believe it reasonable to ask why do we have cpuset separation for the memory and CPU's under the kernel.

> Native Resource manager would eliminate both these concerns I believe.

Can you please explain how it will eliminate these concerns?

> Agree. However, it makes sense to discuss this further, find out proc and cons of each approach and select the best of two in my opinion.

Can you please start a document that will describe pros of the `Native Resource manager` and we will add our thoughts under it?

> HugePages and Memory are quite different resources from usage point of view. Following your logic why not to separate them too?

Because you can not pin memory and hugepages of the same process to different NUMA nodes when you can do it for the CPUs and memory.

Reviewer 3: What would be the situtation when you would use memory pinning without explicit knowledge about which CPU's the container is going to get pinned to ? And how would you use memory pinning then ? IOW, is there any sane/valid situation when you would use memory pinning but not CPU pinning ?
￼
You might want to pin CPU's only without memory pinning, but I can't come up with any reason to do the other way around.

So it looks to me as
  1. You never pin memory without pinning CPUs
  2. To pin memory, you must know which CPU's you're going to get pinned to
=> It looks to me as if memory pinning would be more like an extra 'feature/flag' of CPU-pinning, one which you might or might not be using, but always in addition to CPU pinning...

Reviewer: I am thinking it is a more architectural decision. We do not prevent from using the memory manager without the CPU manager, but it is your choice like we do not prevent to use CPU manage and device manager without the topology manager, I can say it also can be very inefficient. We have requested to provide some best-practices document, where we can specify that the usage of the memory manager without the CPU manager is inefficient, and provide kubelet configuration samples for different types of systems. But again from my perspective developing and maintain the memory manager as the separate component is much easier than trying to add this functionality under the CPU manager, when the CPU manager developed without concern about the memory.

Reviewer 5: I believe that configuring one component is much easier than 2 from user point of view. Considering than pinning memory is never done without pinning CPUs I think we should discuss this topic again. From both architectural and usability points of view separating memory management from CPU management still looks questionable to me.

I'd propose to discuss this on the next Sig-Node or Resource management WG meeting.

Reviewer: I think from the usability perspective it no difference because you need memory manager flags anyway setting two flags because you have two separate cases:
1. A user wants only CPU pinning
2. A user wants CPU pinning and memory pinning(for this one we will need the flag)

And you still need to provide `reserved-memory` flag, because `system-reserved` and `kube-reserved`, not NUMA aware(the second flag).

Regarding architectural design, I think it much easier to support the memory manager as a separate component from the maintainability perspective. We avoid introducing a new code under the CPU manager that does not really relate to the CPU and that can bring complexity increasing of the existing code under the CPU manager.

#### Internal Container Lifecycle changes

InternalContainerLifecycle will call out Memory Manager on container lifecycle events(Add/Stop) to allocate and reclaim memory resources.

### Feature Gate and Kubelet Flags

A new feature gate will be added to enable the Memory Manager feature. This feature gate will be disabled by default in the early releases.

#### Feature Gate  
`--feature-gate=MemoryManager=true`

#### Memory Manager Policy Flag  
`--memory-manager-policy` - to configure Memory Manager behaviour, `static` enables multi-NUMA (and single-NUMA) feature, whereas `none` disables it 

Example:
`--memory-manager-policy=none` or `--memory-manager-policy=static`

#### Pre-Reserved Memory Zone Flag

This will be also followed by a Kubelet Flag for the Memory Manager configuration, which is described above in [The configuration of Memory Manager](#the-configuration-of-memory-manager) section.

`--pre-reserved-memory-zone=[{numa-node=int, memory-type=string, limit=string}][,][...]`

Example:
   `--pre-reserved-memory-zone= {numa-node=0, memory-type=memory, limit=1Gi}, {numa-node=1, memory-type=memory, limit=1Gi}`

#### Multi-NUMA Groups Flag

> `--multi-numa-groups` - to configure disjoint groups of NUMA nodes, used for preferred multi-NUMA node memory allocation

Reviewer 5: I'm still concerned about user experience with this. Specifying groups manually can be hard, especially on a clusters with big number of nodes. I think we should discuss this further.

Would it make sense to consider dynamic configuration? One way of doing this was proposed earlier in the comments: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1203#discussion_r387660159

Reviewer: We dropped this flag from the alpha version, and we generate multi NUMA node hints dynamically. Currently, it returns preferred multi NUMA hint only in case if it no option to satisfy the container requests with the single NUMA node(it means that allocatable of all NUMA nodes less than container requests).

We can re-think the calculation of the multi NUMA preferred hints in the future, but it will be possible only once we will have additional information about the NUMA topology(distances between nodes)

Reviewer 5: Would it make sense to describe dynamic generation of the hints in this document?

As for distances between nodes would [this KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1718) help with it? If so, should it be referred here?

Reviewer 4: @bart0sh Could you indicate what you exactly understand by "dynamic generation"? I went through the conversation (this one: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1203#discussion_r387660159 ), but I could only reach something like called "a maximally pessimistic accounting algorithm". Is that what you meant?

Reviewer 5: The idea expressed in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1203#discussion_r387660159 as far as I understood it is to allocate memory to the minimal possible set of NUMA nodes using 'HW topology tree' approach described in that comment:

- You have the NUMA nodes as the leaves at the bottom in the tree
- above them you have the sockets, each socket having its NUMA nodes as children
- at the root, you have a tree node representing the full machine, with all sockets as children

At the bottom you start with the memory physically attached to the NUMA nodes. As you go up in the tree you always have as available memory the sum of available memory in the children. When you allocate, you assign the container to a tree node where it definitely fits in and you account for the memory allocation at that node as such. In all children of this node allocation you assume the worst case: that the allocation would fully be taken from that single child (because as you yourself noticed/pointed out, you can't know or control where it will take place).

This approach would dynamically define groups of NUMA nodes based on how far NUMA nodes are from each other. It'd also cover both single and cross-numa allocations.

Reviewer: Currently, the flow for multi NUMA hints generation is:

1. We check the container requests for memory and hugepages, if it can be satisfied by the one node(it does not mean that it can be satisfied right now because we check allocatable memory) we will set prefer for single NUMA hints only, it means that possible the situation that we will return hints without preferred hints at all, because all preferred hints will be filtered because of lack of memory or hugepages, or because it already used for the multi-numa node allocation for other containers

2. The container requests can not be satisfied with the single NUMA node, in this case, we will check all permutations for NUMA nodes and set preferred to true only for hints that have the minimal number of NUMA nodes that can satisfy the container requests, so if this number 2, we will have hints 0011, 0101, 1001, 0110, 1010, 1100 with preferred field equal to true(again this list can be filtered after it by the memory manager, because of the amount of available memory and hugepages or because one of the nodes under the permutation already used in the single NUMA node allocation for the other container)

3. Because we always return the ordered list, the order that the topology hint will iterate over hints will be 0011, 0101, 1001,...,1100, so it definitely possible that the hint 1001 will be preferred over 1100, but it possible the situation when the hint 1100 will be rejected by the topology manager, and in this case, we still want to use other preferred hints. Currently, the only way to define the preferred hints it is via the `preferred` boolean, if it can be changed to score, we can adapt our algorithm to calculate the score for each hint with the minimal amount of NUMA nodes, but it the subject for the further discussion.

### Feature Gate and Kubelet Flags

A new feature gate will be added to enable the Memory Manager feature. This feature gate will be disabled by default in the early releases.

#### Feature Gate  
`--feature-gate=MemoryManager=true`

#### Memory Manager Policy Flag  
`--memory-manager-policy` - to configure Memory Manager behaviour, `static` enables cross-NUMA feature, whereas `none` disables it 

Example:
`--memory-manager-policy=none` or `--memory-manager-policy=static`

#### Pre-Reserved Memory Zone Flag

This will be also followed by a Kubelet Flag for the Memory Manager configuration, which is described above in [The configuration of Memory Manager](#the-configuration-of-memory-manager) section.

`--pre-reserved-memory-zone=[{numa-node=int, memory-type=string, limit=string}][,][...]`

Example:
   `--pre-reserved-memory-zone= {numa-node=0, memory-type=memory, limit=1Gi}, {numa-node=1, memory-type=memory, limit=1Gi}`

> #### Cross-NUMA Groups Flag

Reviewer: > Correct me if I'm wrong. One "cross-NUMA group" it's one cpuset cgroup instance, right? You introduced "cross-NUMA group" since you faced with overlap problem, right?

We introduced this flag, just for the purpose to give way to a user to configure preferred nodes for multiple NUMA node memory allocation. This is an optional flag, and if it not provided we will just follow the minimal number of NUMA nodes pattern.

> Did you asked in linux kernel mailing list about extending this cgroup controller. Of course nobody knows when it will happen even linux kernel community will be agree with that change, but technically it's possible.

Can you please clarify what do you mean by extending the cgroup controller?

> Also is cpuset.mem_exclusive planned here or not?

Currently no. We want to have the same behavior as we have under the CPU manager.

> #### Cross-NUMA Groups Flag

Reviewer 8: > > Correct me if I'm wrong. One "cross-NUMA group" it's one cpuset cgroup instance, right? You introduced "cross-NUMA group" since you faced with overlap problem, right?
> 
> We introduced this flag, just for the purpose to give way to a user to configure preferred nodes for multiple NUMA node memory allocation. This is an optional flag, and if it not provided we will just follow the minimal number of NUMA nodes pattern.
The question was not about the option, it was about additional entity cross-NUMA.
> 
> > Did you asked in linux kernel mailing list about extending this cgroup controller. Of course nobody knows when it will happen even linux kernel community will be agree with that change, but technically it's possible.
> 
> Can you please clarify what do you mean by extending the cgroup controller?
Did you ask in lkml about their future plan on cpuset cgroup controller or another controller in cgroup v2?
> 
> > Also is cpuset.mem_exclusive planned here or not?
> 
> Currently no. We want to have the same behavior as we have under the CPU manager.
ok, but cpuset.cpu_exclusive it's about core, but cpuset.mem_exclusive about a NUMA nodes.

> #### Cross-NUMA Groups Flag

Reviewer: > The question was not about the option, it was about additional entity cross-NUMA.

Sorry, I just was unsure what did you mean by `one cpuset cgroup instance`, the cross NUMA groups will create an abstract memory pinning group, but it will not create a new hierarchy under cgroups.

> Did you ask in lkml about their future plan on cpuset cgroup controller or another controller in cgroup v2?

As far as I know, we did not ask, maybe @bg-chun has more information.

> Currently no. We want to have the same behavior as we have under the CPU manager.

I meant that the CPU manager does not use exclusive, so, for now, we will also avoid to use it. I believe using the `cpuset.mem_exclusive` can be considered as additional feature under the memory manager.
.
